
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.033
October 21, 1999

1) Yiddish and Hebrew (Abraham Brumberg)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 19 Oct 1999 14:24:13 -0400 (EDT)
From: abraham brumberg <ABrumberg@compuserve.com>
Subject: YIDDISH AND HEBREW--A RESPONSE TO MY CRITICS

Last July, Konstanty Gebert, editor of the monthly MIDRASH, published in
Warsaw, asked me to contribute an article on the strife between Hebrew and
Yiddish for a special section of his journal devoted to "Jewish Historical
Quarrels." I accepted his invitation, and wrote a piece that was promptly
published in MIDRASH.  I then sent it to "Mendele" and also to some of my
friends.  Unfortunately, the piece, which I had originally intended to deal
largely with the "war" between Hebrew and Yiddish in Palestine/Israel,
turned out to have a number of inaccuracies, some of them minor, a few more
grievous, as several readers were quick to point out.  I apologize for the
errors, and I apologize, too, for the belated response, which was caused by
an enormous backlog of work I had to finish before turning my attention to
this matter.

Now in reply to my critics.

Mr. Bruce Mitchell of Oxford, England,calls attention to what is perhaps my
most egregious error--namely, the dismissive remarks concerning Ladino
language and culture.  He offers compelling evidence of the continued
flourishing of Ladino which, unfortunately, I had overlooked.  The fact, as
he writes, that doctorates have been awarded to scholars who made no less
ghastly mistakes is of little comfort to me.... 

The information about the relative neglect of Ladino by Israeli
authorities, as depicted by Mr. Mitchell, tends to bear out one of my
major assertions regarding the position of Yiddish--and by extension other
Jewish languages--in Israel.  Until a fairly short while ago, Yiddish and
Ladino were officially identified as "foreign" languages, and although
that absurd epithet has now been dropped, both are still treated as
"aliens" or, at best, as poor cousins.  I am also glad to see that Mr. 
Mitchell corroborates what I said about the Sokhnut's squalid attempts to
discourage the study of Yiddish in the countries that had constituted the
USSR. .  "During my recent visit to Vilna," he writes, "I was sickened by
the way in which the Israeli government bribes Lithuanian Jews not to
teach Yiddish in a school called Sholem Aleichem'. Teach Yiddish as a
living language, and the school gets no funding."

I part ways with Mr. Mitchell on the matter of Yiddish among the
ultra-orthodox..  I discuss this subject in a reviews of the book The
Politics of Yiddish, edited by Dov-Ber Kerler, which will soon appear in
The Jewish Quarterly (London).  I will also send a copy to Mendele.
Suffice it to say at this point that I do not deny the importance of
Yiddish among the haredim.  The very fact that Yiddish is taught in
ultra-orthodox schools in Israel and elsewhere constitutes a guarantee
against the erosion of the Yiddish language.  But the ultra-orthodox by
and large deny that Yiddish has any form or specific grammar.  They teach
Yiddish exclusively as a spoken language, and will have nothing to do with
anything that smacks of secular Yiddish, be it literature, scholarship,
folklore, ethnography, and the like. Yet these achievements are what
spawned the efflorescence of Yiddish and Yiddish culture.  Think of
Yiddish without Peretz, Mendele, Sholem Aleichem, without An-sky, without
YIVO, without di vilner trupe, without the panoply of cultural and social
institutions it created in Eastern Europe and you get a barren, fallow
landscape.  In this sense, Yiddish among the ultra-orthodox is no
contribution to Yiddish culture as it had developed from the l9th century
until the Holocaust. 

The comparison with German in the United States: Here, I fear, Mr. 
Mitchell is barking up the wrong tree. To the extent that German is used
in certain areas of the country, it is, of course, very much of a living
presence.  The use of German among the Old Amish (I am not aware whether
this holds true for all the Amish and for the Mennonites), however, is an
oddity quite unrelated to modern German.  I remember once in Pennsylvania
some Old Amish showed me their only German book--the Bible.  Moreover, as
far as I know, Amish children do not use German, of whatever dialect, in
spoken discourse. By comparison, the haredim are a vibrant source of a
functioning idiomatic Yiddish. 

Another critic, Mr. Charles Fuchsman taxes me, first, with "overstating
the Bund's role in the flowering of Yiddish," inasmuch as the best Yiddish
writers had begun writing even before the Bund's birth in l897. Surely, he
writes, there were some Bundist leaders who were "champions of Yiddish,"
but by and large the Bund "used Yiddish opportunistically." 

Not quite.  Of course Yiddish literature predates the Bund, but if
Mr.Fuchsman is not aware of the immense role of the Bund in developing
Yiddish in interwar Poland, I can only suggest that he read some relevant
histories of this period.  Yes, the Bund first turned to Yiddish as a
medium, and not as a value in itself.  But this soon changed.  For
details, may I suggest my essay on the Bund in the current issue of Jewish
Social Studies?  Incidentally, Khaim Zhitlovsky was never a Bundist,
though with his passionate advocacy of socialism, secular Yiddish culture
and national autonomy he stood close to the Band during the first few
decades of this century. 

As for Soviet Yiddish literature--Mr. Fuchsman's second objection-- I
happen am a great admirer of much of it; indeed, I feel that poets like
Hofshteyn, Izi Kharik, Aaron Kushnirov and Peretz Markish in some respects
towered over their contemporaries in Eastern Europe and the United States
at the time of their debuts.  And while Yiddish literature in
pre-revolutionary Russia and then in Poland yielded a number of great
figures, Der Nister was certainly among the most gifted contemporary
Yiddish prose writers of this century. Furthermore, it is true that
Yiddish culture lived on for quite a few years in the USSR.  Bit it turned
into a castrated culture, with a grotesque orthography, shorn of many
"clerical" or "Zionist" (that is, Hebrew) words, whipped into the vise of
Soviet patriotism and "socialist realism", its practitioners required to
engage in abject "self-criticism" for their various sins and rewrite their
works (Der Nister and Hofshteyn among them), all of which has b been fully
dealt with in books such as Zvi Gitelman's volume on the "Yevsektsia",
works by Irving Howe, Choneh Shmeruk and Benjamin Harshav and others.  Mr. 
Fuchsman resents terms such as "unconditional fealty to the Third Rome," 
but unhappily even those Communists who wanted to preserve Yiddish culture
acted as its greavediggers, most of them not out of fear or opportunism
but out of fealty to the Communist doctrine. 

Vos shaykh khaver Mendy Fliegler, vil ikh im farzikhern az ir bin nit keyn
soyne-idish, un ikh halt nit az "idish geyt unter."  Ikh vil zikh do nokh
a mol farrufn oyf mayn retsenzye in The Jewish Quarterly.  Ober ikh hob
moyre az guzmes veln do veynik helfn.  Di tog shule in Vashington lernt
idish oyfn shpitz meser, un idish reders vet zi oyf dem oyfn nit
dertsiyen. 
 Un zol mir khaver fliegler zayn moykhl, ober keyn idish reders in poyln
vet er oyf a refue nit gefinen (ikh zog es oyfn smakh fun nit veynik
derfarung). Tsum badoyern iz di situatsye nor a bisl beser in rusland un
ukraine.  Nito vos zikh araynleygn feygelekh in buzem.

Let me respond, finally, to the thoughtful letter by Dovid Fishman, which
he sent to me outside the framework of Mendele.

To begin with, Dovid Fishman points out that Zionism had played an
important role in supporting and advancing Yiddish culture, and he adduces
numerous examples, from the Zionist Ahiasaf society which "published the
first truly modern Yiddish weekly in Eastern Europe, Der Yid, l899-1903," 
and which "spearheaded the meteoric rise of modern Yiddish literature," to
the first Yiddish daily in Russia, Der Fraynd, l903-l911 (St. Petersburg),
which was also founded by Zionists, and other examples.  He also adds an
important caveat--that there was a significant distinction to be drawn
"between Zionism (especially labor Zionism) in Eastern Europe and
America...and Zionism (including labor Zionism) in the Yishuv."

Fishman is quite right.  I should have mentioned the striking Yiddish
initiatives launched and supported by Zionists, especially of the
socialist-Zionist variety.  But the distinction he himself draws is
crucial. With but a few exceptions, the Zionists who supported Yiddish in
the "Diaspora" became its determined adversaries in the Yishuv. 

Ideology--a topic to which I shall return in a minute--and not some
perverse transmogrification due to the presence of the Judea Hills or the
salubrious winds from the Galilee or the Wailing Wall was the crux of the
matter.  Rachel Katznelson, as Benjamin Harshav illustrates in his
Language in Time of Revolution (p. 189), who was extremely fond of Yiddish
and of modern Yiddish writers, asserted that "there was in Yiddish thought
a cowardice and lack of criticism concerning everything national...Yiddish
was conservative and did not see beyond today.  Do I need to mention the
important newspaper Fraynd [the journal referred to by Fishman], the Bund,
Zhitlovsky?", etc.

All of this is humbug: Katzenelson was well aware that the Bund, for
instance, did see rather a great deal (perhaps even too much, some might
think) "beyond today."  But the mystique of Hebrew as the sublime
expression of national liberation dictated myopic assessments such as
hers.

"Many of the founding fathers of Yiddish culture," says Fishman, "were
Zionists," and he mentions a few distinguished names.  True--but none of
those he mentioned had to experience the indignity of their works
appearing for a long time only in Hebrew.  "Nearly all branches of Poale
Tziyon," he writes, "were Yiddishists". The word "Ysiddishist" is a
misnomer, because Yiddishism as such denoted an ideology that advocated
Yiddish as the only language of the Jews, and as one to be used in all
cultural and official institutions, as a secular culture divorced from
tradition as religious roots.  Not many of the most fervent defenders of
Yiddish necessarily subscribed to this exclusive (and thus, I am afraid,
rather parochial) ideology. The Czernowitz Conference of l908, , for
instance, which Fishman refers to, did not declare Yiddish as the national
language, but a language of the Jews--much to the dismay of its Yiddishist
participants..  (For a sensible survey of Yiddishism, see "Yiddishism and
Judaism," by Emanuel S.  Goldsmith, in the aforementioned The Politics of
Yiddish.)  True, Labor Zionists played a central role in creating schools,
newspapers, and various other institutions in Yiddish in Poland, the
United States, in s Canada, Mexico, and Argentina.  The differences
between the Labor Zionists on the one hand and on the other m and the Band
and similar groups on the other was that the first believed in
"bi-lingualism," as it were, in the "Diaspora,"  and only Hebrew in the
Yishuv. Only the Left Poale Zion was as loyal to Yiddish in Eastern Europe
(especially Poland) as in the Yishuv, and published a Yiddish weekly in
Palestine called Nayvelt. 

Fishman also takes me to task for misrepresenting "Bundist anti-Hebraism," 
as displayed in the "virulent" rhetoric of such Bundist anti-Hebraists as
Esther Frumkin and Moishe Rafes.  True, but this was in Tsarist Russia,
under quite different circumstances.  In Poland, the Bund waged a fierce
struggle against what it considered the Zionist attempt to denigrate
Yiddish, and to prevent its acquiring what it considered to be the
legitimatge position of primus inter pares.  But I am not aware of any
contempt shown Hebrew as a language, comparable to the contempt heaped
upon Yiddish by Hebraists in Palestine. 

I find Fishman's attempt to rationalize the the official attitudes towards
Yiddish in the Yishuv --e.g., if there was no Yiddish daily paper it was
not because of specific legal bans on it, but "because paper was rationed
by the state...and the ministry would not allot paper fore a Yiddish
daily" -- singularly unconvincing.  It reminds me, mutatis mutandis--of
the uncertain press policies pursued by the Soviet government in the first
few years of Gorbachev's "glasnost." Fishman is too fine a scholar not
to know that to practice of auditoriums "refusing to rent themselves out
to Yiddish theaters" can be as harmful to the existence of the Yiddish
performing arts as drama than a piece of paper bearing the full imprimatur
of the Law and signed by the Yishuv authorities, or by the Knesset. He
acknowledges the effect on Yiddish of the raucous zealotry of some
Hebraists, but claims their attacks were "no worse than [attacks on] other
foreign languages". Yiddish, Japanese, Hungarian and Icelandic all equally
"foreign" languages?" 

For an enlightening report on what it meant to be a Yiddish speaker and/or
writer in Palestine, see the essay fuftsik yor idishe sheferishkayt in
isroel (Half a Century Jewish Creativity in Israel) by the writer, editor,
journaloist and crfitic Mordekhai Tsanin, which appeared in the Yiddish
journal idishe kultur (New York, May-June l998).

Tsanin, still the editor of a the Yidish daily letste nayes in Tel Aviv
(until the 1950s the authorities did not allow it to appear as a daily),
who has spent the bulk of his 90-odd year old life in Israel, is as
devoted to the country as he is to Yiddish and as unforgiving vis-a-vis
its detractors. He cites the names of numerous Yiddish poets who in the
1920s persisted in writing Yiddish verse, and wonders "whence they drew
the strength to sing the praises of the rejuvenated Eretz Israel in the
atmosphere of hatred and militant hostility to the Yiddish tongue and the
profound folk values embedded in that wonderful language." 

"In those years," writes Tsanin, " an unwritten law [Dovid Fishman please
note] stipulated that a new immigrant to Palestine has the right to speak
Yiddish one year after arriving in the country."  Should he break this
unwritten law, he could be shorn of a day's pay or subjected to other
unpleasant measures.  This was the time when newspaper kiosks would be set
on fire for selling Yiddish publications, and when meetings at which
Yiddish was spoken were frequently broken up and the participants roughed
up.  The fondness for Yiddish xdsespite all these depredations was not
characteristic only of parts of the Left (e.g., the Left Poale Zion). 

Even Uri Zvi Greenberg, a fanatic member of of Zhabotinsky's rightist
Revisionist Party, (and pro-grammatically a bitter opponent of Yiddish),
who had in the early l920s contributed to the Yiddish expressionist
journal "Albatross," published in Berlin, kept on writing Yiddish poetry
after he came to Palestine in l924e--but not for publication.  Tsanin
urged him to "come out of the closet", which he finally did by publishing
a few poems 1975-1979--this after nearly 30 years of silence!. 

The hostility to Yiddish continued uninterrupted after the birth of
Israel, says Tsanin, through the forms of discrimination changed.  Until
1952, only visiting Yiddish theatrical groups from abroad were allowed to
perform on Israeli stages.  Tsanin tells a fascinating story concerning
Shloyme Zalmen Rubashov, who late changed his namer to Shazar and became
third President of Israel.  Shazar loved Yiddish and indeed wrote in that
language, yet when he was appointed head of the Department of Culture of
the Jewish Agency (Tsanin does not provide the date), he sent a delegation
to Buenos Aires, with orders to close down its Sholem Aleichem School
which, though under Zionist auspices, used Yiddish as the language of
instruction. "Ideology!", exclaims Tsanin.  Precisely. 

Years later, when Avrom Sutskever had left Russia and was planning to
settle in the United States, Rubashov, then editor of Davar, begged him to
settle in Israel.  Sutskever concurred, on the condition he could publish
a literary journal in Yiddish.  In order to avoid "a liberum veto"  by the
Ben Gurion government, Rubashov arranged that the journal, di goldene
keyt, destined to become the most luminous literary journal in Yiddish, be
published by the Histadrut.  True, as Dovid Fishman notess the Histadrut
is a quasi governmental agency," but it is nevertheless significant that
the journal had to be provided with a fig leaf if it was to continue
publication in Israel.. (See Tsanin's article for other curious examples
of Marano-type tactics which Yiddish writers were forced to adopt for many
years.)

Finally, what about the state of Yiddish in Israel today?  I confess that
in my essay I exaggerated the malevolent attitude of the Israeli
authorities and its detrimental effect on Yiddish.  Dovid Fishman,
however, sins rather on the other side..  Yes, the state subsidizes the
few Yiddish radio, and the Yiddish theater "receives most of its funds
from the Tel Aviv municipal government"--this among other other positive
measures that have been implemented.

Yet pace Fishman, the situation with respect to Yiddish in public schools
is far from encouraging.  According to Fishman, "Yiddish is taught as a
third language in about 50 schools,": the costs covered by the state
budget.  Yet the fact is that although at first -- as a result of a grant
in the amount of $300,000 oferred by a wealthy Canadian Jew to Bar Ilan
University a few years ago--50 classes came into being, they have now been
reduced to less than 40 classes where Yiddish is taught once or twice
weekly--this out of a total of 45,000 classes in 3050 schools in the
country.  (See Mordkhe Dunits, government supervisor for the study of
Yiddish in Israel, Forverts, NY October 1, 1999).; and also "Gender,
Literacy, and Religiosity: Dimensions of Yiddish Educaiton in Israeli
Government-Supported Schools," by Bryna Bogoch, International Journal of
the Sociology of Languages, No. 138, l999), This negligible number may be
further reduced, writes Bogoch and also I. Luden in lebns-fragn (Tel
Aviv), mainly because of recent budget cuts and the lack of Yiddish
teachers--a situation that could be ameliorated only by the appropriation
of more funds. 

Three years ago the Knesset established a special agency to preserve the
cultural treasures of Yiddish and Latinoand encourage various activities
in those two areas.  The Ladino section, as far as I know, has been
operating successfully since its formation, but the Yiddish section has
thus far received only part of the yearly $350.000 that had been allotted
to it. According to the September-October l999 issue of lebns-fragn, a
number of festivals, theatrical productions and concerts are being planned
for the near future.  About the only program thus far was an evening
devoted to Yiddish songs, poetry readings, and theatrical excerpts, which
took place around Rosh Hashana this yea, in Tel Aviv. Despite its modest
conception, the evening, according to lebns-frfagn, "was transformed
spontaneously into a festive manifestation of Yiddish artistic
expression."

How effective all these initiatives will prove in the course of time is a
subject for vague speculation only..  The question to ask oneself is what
those initiatives are meant to achieve.  If it is to restore Yiddish to
its prewar status as a robust, functioning culture and as a language for
communication among many people, the answer is that this is almost
certainly not destined to happen. If, on the other hand, the idea is to
encourage various Yiddish and Yiddish oriented activities, from klezmer
camps to scholarly conferences, from occasional theatrical performances to
the encouragement of Yiddish language course--much on the line, that is,
of what is happening in the United States, then there is some ground for
optimism.

The realization of even modest goals, however, depends vitally on the
Israeli authorities.  Thus far, as I have noted, their response (from
being chintzy with money tolopenly discouraging Yiddish in Ukraine and
Russia) is far from satisfactory.  The burden of past policies, past
enmities and past zealotry still lie heavily upon the Israeli
Establishment and Israeli society.  Call this offensive or outrageous; 
but above all it is a source of pity and a misfortune, for just as Yiddish
had ceased to offer any challenge to the position of Hebrew, it is still
being treated with circumspection, with disrespect, and callous lack of
generosity.

Abraham Brumberg
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.033

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



