
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 07.136
January 20, 1998

1) Der Berditchever Rov (Burton (Berel) Leiser)
2) Levi Yitzhak of Berdichev (Allen Maberry)
3) Levi Yitzhak (Bob Kurtzman)
4) mishling (Joshua Fogel)
5) tuleyne and Shakespeare (Dan Gilman)
6) khaykl shapire in yiddish (Dovid Yosef Herskovic)
7) Yiddish Word for Sweaters (Jim Feldman)
8) bal-dover (Monika Feil)
9) yidish in di oygn fun di yunge (mirke (marion) herbst)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jan 1998 11:09:55 EST
From: BLeiser77 <BLeiser77@aol.com>
Subject: Der Berditchever Rov

In response to the inquiry in 07.133 regarding Reb Levi Yitzkhok's Din Toyre:

Reb Levi Yitzkhok ben Meir of Berditchev (1740-1810) was one of the greatest
of all the khsidim during the early days of that movement.  He is still
revered as a great tzaddik, and his wisdom is frequently recounted by
khsidisch rebbes at tisch on shabbes and yontif. 

He was renowned throughout eastern Europe, especially Poland and the Ukraine,
in his day, and took on the misnagdim in public debates.  He even had the
khutzpeh to organize Jewish leaders to oppose the governments prohibition of
Jewish settlements and other oppressive measures. 

He emphasized the virtues of joy and dvekus (adhering to God), and prayer
davening (you should excuse the expression) with devotion and fervor.

He often addressed God directly in his prayers, pleading the cause of his
people.  From these famous prayers came the well-known and often-recorded
Kaddish of R. Levi Yitzkhok, in which he pleads with the Lord to have
rakhmones on his folk Yisroel.  Zalman Shneur's poem, "Din Toyre Khodosh
l'rabbi Levi Yitzkhok mi-Berditchev, is one of many in which his prayers are
depicted; and Yosef Opatoshu's story, "In Poylishe Velder," portrays him. 

For further information, check the Encyclopedia Judaica's excellent article
about him. 

Burton (Berel) Leiser

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jan 1998 09:19:55 -0800 (PST)
From: "A. Maberry" <maberry@u.washington.edu>
Subject: Levi Yitzhak of Berdichev

I vaguely remember a record of cantorial and other arias which I heard in the
early 1970s (which explains the vagueness of my response). It contained this
piece, but I think the title on the record was "The Prayer of Levi Yitzhak of
Berdichev". I have looked at the contents of records done by Jan Peerce from
the 1960s and 70s but I can't find this title.  As far as I can determine, "A
din-toyre mit Got" is also known as the "Kaddish fun Rabi Levi-Yitzhak
Barditshever" and has been set to music at least 3 and possibly more times.
Once by Joel Engel (1868-1927) as the "Kaddisch des Rabbi Levi-Jitzchak
Barditzewer" (Berlin: Juwal, 1923); by Leo Low (1878-1962) as "A din-toyre mit
Got (R. Levi Yitshak Berditshever's kadish)" (New York: Metro Music, 1927);
and by Erwin Jospe "A din toire mit Got (A judgement against God" (New York:
Board of Jewish Education, 1951". 

As I recall, the record also contained a rendition of "Hineni". It might have
come in a greyish color box and included a rather large book of the texts of
the arias along with other notes. If anyone can identify it, I would be
anxious to know as I would like to find a copy or a tape of it. 

Allen Maberry

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 22:27:41 +0200
From: "Gilda and Bob Kurtzman" <kurtzman@sharenet.co.il>
Subject: Levi Yitzhak

In answer to Susan Kray's query about Levi Yitzhak , let me say there was a
Levi Yitzhak from Berditchiv and he according to a prayer song he composed
brought the Master of the Universe to a din toyra on Rosh Hashana or Yom
Kippur. We are not dealing with a mythical figure but an actual person.  Levi
Yitzhak (c. 1740-1810) ben Meir was the son of a prominent rabbi. His father
was attracted to what was then a young movement. hasidism and Levi Yitzhak
became a hasid .After Levi Yitzhak was ordained a rabbi he preached and
practiced hasidism much to the chagrin of the misnagdim (anti-Hasidism). He
was admired even by the misnagdim for his knowledge of talmud and halacha
(Jewish law).He was utterly devoted to his people Israel and only rebuked
their waywardness with loving care. He suffered the misfortunes of his fellow
Jews and along with other Jewish leaders turned to the authorites to remove
the prohibition on Jewish settlement in the villages. He stressed the good
that is in man and always pleaded the cause of Jews.He said that only he who"
admonishes Jewish people gently, elevatestheir souls and always extols their
righteousness is worthy of being their leader.Levi Yitzhak always sees the
positive in what individual Jews do. While Jews chided and rebuked a baal
agola (wagon driver) who while praying with his talis and tefilin was greasing
the axles of his wagon . According to the legend Levi Yitzhak turns to the
Holy One Blessed Be He and says: How wonderfull are your children Israel,
while he is working he prays to you.(For a full picture of the historical Levi
Yitzhak and the legend see Encyclopedia Judaica,volume 11 pp. 102-104

Popular tradition has preserved prayor songs attributed to Levi Yitzhak. In
singing his prayers he addressed the Creator in Yiddish. He is most famous for
"The Kaddish of Reb. Levi Yitzhak" According to one tradition Levi Yitzhak
overwhelmed by the suffering the physical and spiritual woes of his brethern
and as the defender of his people he comes before the Almighty on Rosh Hashana
or Yom Kippur and in a sense brings the Almighty to trial

Levi Yitzhak prepares his case very carefully and tries to avoid bringing any
evidence that can be refuted. He says good morning Master of the Universe I,
Levi Yitzhak son of Sara come to bring you to trial in the name of your people
Israel.( A dear departed friend once said , you notice Levi Yitzhak
identifiies himself as son of Sara and not Meir. You know when they make a
blessing for someone who is ill and wish him a quick recovery they call him
son of and mention his mothers name. We want to identify the ill person as
definitely as possibleI We know for certain who his mother was but...  In the
song Levi Yitzhak asks what does the Almighty want from them,why all this
suffering why all the terrible decrees. He mentions great nations that were
and are gone. The English claim that their king is a king. The Italians claim
that their kingdom is a kingdom, but I Levi Yitzhak son of Sara say the KING
WHO SEATS ON THE HIGHEST THRONE IS THE KING.  I will not move from this place
and a miracle should occur and an end to all the suffering hould come, now (
Nothing happens no sign is given Levi Yitzhak realizes he has lost the trial
but he has not lost his faith and with tears in his eyes and heart proclaims
his faith Yisgadal vyiskadash shmay raba (Magnified and consecrated is His
name. 

It is a powerful piece and has been a favorite number for Yiddish singers,
especially cantors. Some of the most famous renditions that I have heard are
by Jan Peerce, Moishe Oiysher and Moishe Kousivitzky. 

Bob Kurtzman 
        
4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jan 1998 14:45:27 -0800
From: "Joshua Fogel" <fogel@humanitas.ucsb.edu>
Subject: mishling?

A colleague who is not a subscriber to Mendele asked me to post the following
query: 

The term "Mischling," since it was used by the Nazis in the Nuremberg Laws,
has terrible connotations.  On H-Antisemitism it has been asserted that the
term is entirely a German term, whereas others have suggested that it existed
in Yiddish before the nazi period and referred to a "half-Jew" in the sense of
someone with a Jewish father and non-Jewish mother.  Weinreich simply lists
"half-breed." Does anyone have any more specific information about the
pre-1933 uses of the term by Yiddish speakers? 

Joshua Fogel
Santa Barbara, CA

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 01:22:08 -0500
From: Dan Gilman <dgilman@haverford.edu>
Subject: tuleyne and Shakespeare

My latest question comes from my favorite source of Yiddish words and phrases: 
my grandmother, a second-generation American who mostly spoke English growing
up.  Because her best language was always English, Grandmom's Yiddish seems to
have absorbed a number of Americanisms, as far as I can tell -- I can't verify
this until I learn the language better.  A word that everybody on her side of
the family, including my mother's generation, seems to know is "tuleyne."  Any
guesses before I give it away?  It means "Italian" -- specifically, an Italian
girl or woman.  I know of no "real" Yiddish word for any kind of Italian
person, other than italyener.  This is the basis for my guess that it is an
Americanism.  Also, it seems to me that until my family moved from the Ukraine
and Russia to Philadelphia, there couldn't have been much need for such a
specific term for an Italian.  "Tuleyne" strikes me as a word that grew out of
the sudden need for a handy term for a specific kind of non-Jew; "goy,"
"shikse," and "sheygetz" all became inadequate in a neighborhood filled with
Italians, Irish, Germans, and Poles, as well as Jews from various districts. 
>From the way my family uses it, "tuleyne" seems to be a sub-categorization of
"shikse," since there is no "tuleyner."  An Italian woman is not a tuleyne by
birth, but by association with a Jewish man.  ("Is Harry still dating that
tuleyne?")  So, after all that deep background, does anyone else know anything
about this? 

To completely change topic, Al Grand brought up Shakespearean Yiddish in Vol.
7.133.  I heard an interesting translation a while ago, and I was hoping
somebody could clarify the translation options.  In the play "Conversations
With My Father," by Herb Gardner, an old Yiddish actor gives a condensed
version of his entire repertoire, including favorite Shakespearean roles.  (To
digress for a moment: it's a wonderful play, go see it!)  He recites the
beginning of Hamlet's soliloquy as "Tzu zayn, oder nisht tzu zayn; dos iz di
frage."  However, at an informal lecture that I attended on Yiddish theater
and storytelling, the speaker gave the following English-to-Yiddish-to-English
translation of the same line:  "To be or not to be; that is where the dog is
buried."  Who is right?  Is there a standard Yiddish Hamlet?  Has anyone ever
heard that expression? 

Dan Gilman

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 07:26:02 +0000
From: David Herskovic <david@arctic1.demon.co.uk>
Subject: khaykl shapire in yiddish

Al Grand hot gefreygt vegn Shakespeare (in der haym fleygt men eym rifn khaykl
shapire) in yidish. Ot hot ir a mase. 

Pasirt hot di mase in tof kif lamed tsadik in a shteytl nisht vat fin dantsig.
In deym shteytl hobn gevoynt a minyen mit a halb yidn arangerekhnt in zay a
ruv, a rosh hakohel, a shames, a shoykhet in a melamed. A klayn shteytl fin
yidn in maz; erlikhe yidn vos zenn koym geshlofn in erlikhe maz vos zenn asakh
geshlofn, in ver ret nokh bay nakht hot men fin zay kan muk nisht gehert. 

Vayehi hayoym in deym derfele in der rosh hakohel, a yinger mentsh, iz loy
olayni v'loy alaykhem avek. Er hot nebekh iber gelost a yinge almone mit a
yoseml, khayim hot er gehaysn, fin a por yor alt. Es is dorkh di shive, di
shloyshim in der shtot hot ofgenimn far a rosh hakohel a bridr finm nifter. Es
zenn fariber nokh a por khodoshim in men hot ongehoybn tsi redn shidikhim farn
elnde almone. 

Der frishe rosh hakohel iz gevekyn an altn bokhr in eym hot zikh farshmekt
khasene tsi hobn mit zan brider's almone. Der shtot hot zikh iber gedrayt of
tishe nantsig: vos hayst? loy yayose khayn bimkoymayni, s'iz a beferesher lav
in di toyre in nokh dertsi a rosh hakohel. Der ruv farshtayt zikh hot
gepaskent az men tor nisht nor der ruv iz take run;  balebos iz ober der rosh
hakohel. Dos por folk hobn khasene gehat in es hot kayner nisht dervagt zikh
keygn tsishteln. 

Es zenen fariber apor yor in khayiml iz ofgevaksn in er iz gevor gevorn fin di
gantse mase. Fin groys agmes neyfesh iz in eym aran, nisht hant gedakht, a
dibek. Er fleygt arim loyfn of di geser shrayen az er zeyt shaydim in az der
tate kimt tsi eym alts in kholem. Ven er is gor meshige gevorn fleygt er
nokhloyfn di maydlekh: amol hot er zikh tsikisht mit zay in amol hot er zay
balaydikt. 

Er fletgt okh shreklekh bazidln zan shtif tate in zan mame bifnay kohel
v'ayde. Amol of pirim hot er gemakht a shpil in er hot oysgedrayt der pirim
mase az vashti hot gor geharget akhashvayroyshn in homon hot zikh in vashtin
farshmekt in khasene gehat mit ir. Der rosh hakohel is aroysgelofn in der mit,
der oylm hot zikh gehaltn in di zatn in s'iz geveyn layehidim hoyso oyro. 

Di shtot hot zikh mit eym mekhaye geveyn. Nokh dem pirim mase hot men eym
anomn gegeybn khayim lets vos fin deym iz gevorn khayimlet. 

Oser di ale mases hot er getanet az vibald der ruv hot tsi gelost aza shtikl
iz bay eym opgefreygt gants yidishkayt in er vert a maskil. Er hot zikh
getosht di klayder in ofgehert redn yidish. Er hot zikh dertsi osgelernt
eynglish in geredt groyse filozofishe bagrifn vos kayner hot nisht farshtanen.
Men hot eym oykh gezeyn redn tsi zikh alayn in nokh azelkhe meshinedike zakhn. 

Er fleygt oft kimn in bes medresh aran baym daf hayoymi shier in shtil
oyshern. Ayn tog iz der shier geveyzn dort vi der gemore hot a makhloykes tsi
toyv loy leodom shenivro misheloy nivro dos hayst tsi es is beser farn mentsh
az er is yo bashafn gevorn vi ayder nisht bashafn tsi vern, oder farkert, iz
es endersh nisht bashafn tsi vern vi ayder yo. 

Indzer khayimlet hot dos gehert iz er ofgeshpringn in hoykh arangeshrign inem
shier aran 'To be or not to be? That is the question'. 

Der oylm hot gornisht farshtanen fin vos er redt in men hot eym probirt shtil
tsi makhn, nor yankl khokhem iz okh geveyn baym shier in er iz shoyn yo geveyn
a mayven. Hot er zikh a khap getin dos bord mit ayn hant in mitn tsvaytn hant
hot er avek gemakht khayimlet, 'eh, tsi zan oder nisht tsi zan, okh mir a
shale'.

Dovid Yosef Herskovic

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 10:56:31 -0500
From: "Jim Feldman" <wexfeld@worldnet.att.net>
Subject: Yiddish Word for Sweaters

Does anyone know whether there is a Yiddish word for "sweater" -- the knit
garment worn in the winter time?  Weinreich lists "sveter," but that sounds
like either a neologism or at best a term that exists only in America. 
Harkavy lists terms that have to do with sweating or with working in a
sweatshop.  In light of the close connection between = Eastern European Jews
and the garment trade, I would be surprised if they did not have a term for
"sweater."  Or is it that knit garments of that type were simply not known in
Eastern Europe? 

Jim Feldman
Washington, D.C.

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 23:48:54 +0100
From: Monika Feil <Monika.Feil@stud.uni-erlangen.de>
Subject: BAL-DOVER

Is there anybody who could translate the word BAL-DOVER into German? My 
English is not good enough to be sure if I got the right meaning of that word
out of my Yiddish-English dictionaries.

Monika Feil

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 18 Jan 1998 21:22:19 EST
From: Miriamke <Miriamke@aol.com>
Subject: yidish in di oygn fun di yunge

tayere mendelyanes,

in los angeles yidishe kultur klub veln mir hobn a simpozye af der teme
"yidish in di oygn fun di yunge." ikh bet di mendelyanes velkhe zaynen baemes
yunge (d.h. geboyren nokh di tsveyte velt malkhome)tsu shikn mir zayere
gedanken.

mirke (marion) herbst
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 07.136

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html






