
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.128
February 9, 1999

1) a grus fun Repino! (Martin Horwitz)
2) Line from a play (Bob Werman)
3) New Jewish Museum in Paris and Yiddish (Marvin Meyer Engel)
4) articles from socialist press (Gerben Zaagsma)
5) Yiddish programs in synagogues (Morrie Feller)
6) relatives and horseshoes (elye palevsky)
7) seminar in Jerusalem (Avraham Novershtern)
8) shtat (Mordkhe Schaechter)
9) yiska (Jan Jonk)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 01:40:05 -0500 (EST)
From: hillel@infopro.spb.su
Subject: a grus fun Repino!

A grus fun Repino (lebn Peterburg!)  
Ikh bin do afn Hillel-seminar in a pansionat(Russitsizm?) 101 kilometr fun
Peterburg. Siz do 200 yinge idishe studentn un yunge layt fun dem gantsn
gevezenem Sovetn-farband. Zey lernen vi azoy tsu firn a Seder (nokh dem zey
veln aroysfirn fun zeyere heymshtet inkleyne shtetlekh oder shtet um makhn
far di idn dortn a Seder Pesakh. Siz shreklekh interesant tsu zehen vi azoy
ernst zey nemen tsu der zakh (vos vest du tuen oyb an alter mentch git an
entfer af a frage un vil redn far tvantsik minut? Nu,in Lemberg ven mir
zenen geven in Drogobych hobn mir bloyz gezogt "a dank"un gegangen vayter!) 
Zey hobn limud (toyre, parshe fun der vokh, tfilah (ikh hobn gehalt a shmues
vegn di "difference" tsvishn "prayer" af eynglish, tfilah af hebreyish,
davenen af idish, un "molitsya"  oder "molitva" af rusish un genutst
mosholim fun rusishe poeziye).  Ober nisht dem bin ikh oysn,di ruakh do
tsvishn di inge layt iz a mechayeh tsu zehen! Fun Tashkent, fun Kharkov, fun
Kiev, fun Lemberg, fun Bryansk, fun Keshenev, fun Odes, fun Omsk (in Sibir!)
zey kimen tsuzamen tsu redn vegn vi azoy tsu makhn a fule idish lebn bay
zikh in shtot. Un in der ovnt di farshidene kolektivn makhn spektakln un
muzik-sho. Siz geven zeyer a sheferishe spektakl vos di yunge layt fun Kiev
hobn gemakht af material fun Peretsn "Khsidishe mayses", say di ernste vi
"Drei matones" say komishe.

Nu, s'iz do a sakh mer tsu ibegebn. Ikh bin doh tsu gefinen proektn vos
undzer Fond (the Jewish Community Development Fund in Russia and Ukraine)
ken shtitsn un ven ikh hob gezen az emetser fun zey krignt Mendele, 'khob
gevolt a grus ibergebn fun vaytn, vaytn Rusland. 

Greetings from Repino (near Petersburg)
I am here at a Hillel-seminar which has brought together 200 young Jews from
all over the former Soviet Union for a week,to study (the parshe of the
week, Jewish mysticism,how to make a Jewish web site and find Jewish
mateiral on the web,etc.)aand mainly,how to lead a Seder in order to then go
back to theri home cities and "take the Seder on the road" to small towns
where Jews do not have the means to do community Seders. It is a real kick
to see how seriously they take this project:(What do you do if someone
elderly wants to spend 20 minutes answering a simple question you pose? A.In
Lvov, we just waited for about 5 minutes, said thank you very, very much,
and went on)  They study all day,starting with a seriuos attempt to make
some serious spiritual sense of the Sabbath Shakris service (I gave a small
talk on the difference between the American sense of the words "prayer" and
"worship", tfilah in Hebrew, and moltiva (prayer) and molitsya (to pray) in
Russian, using examples from Russian poetry. 

But this is not why I write! I am here to find grass roots projects that the
Jewish Community Development Fund in Russia and Ukraine can give some
support to. And I just wanted to tell Mendelyaner that Jewish life is alive
and well in many,many cities in the FSU and that there is someone
in Petersburg who receives Mendele regularly.

Martin Horwitz

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 02:36:53 -0500 (EST)
From: Robert Werman <rwerman@vms.huji.ac.il>
Subject: Line from a play

Can someone help me locate the line, probably from a play,

"Er hat [du hast?] ein croin fun blecht"  [he has {you have} a tin crown]? 

Or as close as you can.  I am notoriously inexact in quoting.  Thanks. 

Bob Werman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 11:42:39 -0500 (EST)
From: marvin engel <maengel@erols.com>
Subject: New Jewish Museum in Paris re Yiddish

I visited the new Jewish museum in Paris last week. It is located in a
restored palacial setting in the heart of Paris- very clean, all spit and
polish. Treatment of subject areas though, is egregiously uneven, with a
heavy emphasis on tshatshkes, and with historical lacunae large enough to
drive several proverbial trucks through. 

I confine my comments to one yawning gap. Prost un pushet, siz dort kemat
gornisht oyf yidish, un nokh vayniker vegn yidish. (Plain and simple, there
is almost nothing in Yiddish and still less about Yiddish.) The exhibits are
physically displayed in one linear path, suggesting that the material
follows a natural, continuous sequence;  this is seriously misleading. Even
the single small display case with a melange of Yiddish material, ranging
from photos of Aleikhem and Mendele to copies of the magazine "khalyastra"
and some old sheet music doesn't identify the material as being in Yiddish.
No one without some reading knowledge of Hebrew and/or Yiddish would get
this.

With one short visit I can't be absolutely certain, but I believe that the
only other mention of Yiddish is a statement, accompanied by photos of their
respective staffs, that there were three Yiddish newspapers in Paris before
WWII: the Communist, the Zionist and the religious.

The uninformed and those who come looking for a warm fuzzy feeling of
identification may think that they've been to the Jewish Louvre, but the
experience is much more akin to what one might have at Disneyland. The
Ashkenaz and a thousand years of Yiddish are reduced to the briefest
footnotes and clean, pristine models of wooden synagogues. They become
accessories in a packaged tour of a never-was antiseptic history. Some have
said that Yiddish is dead; others, that it should be killed. The culture
wars have now come up with a new theory - that Yiddish never was. Nu? 

Marvin Meyer Engel

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 12:22:08 -0500 (EST)
From: gerbn@wxs.nl (Gerben Zaagsma)
Subject: socialism

Dear all,

I have a rather specific question that involves the international history of
socialism and anarchism. I am currently doing research for a museal cd-rom
about Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis, a key figure in the development of
socialism in the Netherlands, who later became an anarchist. One of the
things I am looking for is material about him in the international
(socialist) press. It is very likely that yiddish socialist papers have
written about him. Is there anyone who could provide suggestions about whom
to contact best about this? 

Thanks,
Gerben Zaagsma

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 13:28:29 -0500 (EST)
From: feller@indirect.com (Morris Feller)
Subject: Yiddish programs in synagogues

This past week-end our Reform temple, Temple Chai, sponsored a Yiddish music
program in honor of Shabbos Shira.  Zalman Mlotek conducted our choir in a
program of Yiddish songs on Friday night.  And on Saturday night he and Ms.
Braitman gave a program outlining the development of Yiddish music musicals
and the like over the last 100 years.  On both evenings our sanctuary was
filled, and the programs were enthusiastically received.  This is just one
way that we can continue to promote interest in Yiddish. 

Morrie Feller
Phoenix

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 4 Feb 1999 14:02:53 -0500 (EST)
From: EPalevsky1@aol.com
Subject: relatives and horseshoes

In response to a query on relatives (08.125):

I vaguely recall use of the expression 'ferd, fus, podkeve' (horse,
leg/foot, horseshoe), to describe/deride an attenuated or farfetched
relation(ship) to the subject at hand. 

elye palevsky

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 5 Feb 1999 14:45:14 -0500 (EST)
From: noy@panix.com
Subject: seminar in Jerusalem

Es freyt undz tsu anonsirn a naye initsiativ afn gebit fun hekhere
yidish-limudim: Der ERSHTER INTERNATSIONALER FORSH-SEMINAR IN YIDISHER
KULTUR vet forkumen in Tel Aviv un Yerusholaim, tsvishn 20stn yuni un 2tn
yuli 1999, organizirt durkhn Yivo, dem yidish-opteyl in hebreishn
universitet in Yerusholaim un dem Beys Sholem Aleykhem in Tel Aviv. 

Der seminar vert planirt far graduir-studentn afn gebit fun yidish
unmizrekh-eyropeisher yidisher kultur un geshikhte, zey zoln fartifern un
sistematizirn zeyere yedies. Studentn fun farsheydene lender un
forsh-perspektivn veln zikh bakenen eyner mitn andern un oykh hobn a
gelegnhayt zikh tsu banitsn mit di raykhe forsh-resursn vos gefinen zikh in
Yisroel. 

Di program iz oysn studentn vos viln zikh bateylikn in INTENSIVE LIMUDIM
GEFIRT IN GANTSN AF YIDISH. Der kern fun seminar veln zayn di vayterdike
temes un lektorn: 

- Prof. Mordkhe Altshuler: "Yidishe kultur in Ratn-farband".
- Prof. Khave Turniansky: "Altyidishe literatur".
- Dr. Avrom Novershtern: "Sholem Aleykhems shafn".
- Prof. Khane Norich: "Yidishe literatur in di fareynikte shtatn".
- Prof. Dovid Fishman: "Der onheyb fun der moderner yidisher kultur in
   Mizrekh-Eyrope".
- Prof. Shmuel Kassow: "Yidishe kultur in Poyln tsvishn beyde 
   velt-milkhomes".

Vegn yeder teme vet gegebn vern a tsikl fun finf akademishe lektsyes.  Oyser
dem veln zayn shmuesn mit yidishe shraybers un kultur-tuers. Di ershte vokh
vet der seminar gefirt vern in Tel Aviv. Di tsveyte - in Yerusholaim. 

Der seminar vet onnemen biz akhtsn bateylikte. Der skhar-limed farn seminar
batreft $300. Graduir-studentn veln krign voynung-erter afn khezhbm fun di
organizirers, vi oykh stipendies tsu dekn a mamoshesdikn teyl fun zeyere
rayze-hoytsoes. 

Keyn formeler aplikatsie-boygn iz nishto. Di farinteresirte darfn araynshikn
a briv oder a blitsbriv mit a kurtser biografie, a bashraybung fun zeyere
forsh-interesn un eyn rekomendatsie-briv. 

Di organizatorn hobn fartrakht dem seminar vi an oyfn tsu helfn tsugreytn
dem nayem kader fun yidish-lerers un yidish-forshers iber der velt. Der
tsveyter seminar vert planirt afn yor 2001 - in Amerike. Mir hofn zikh tsu
trefn in a guter sho. 

Dr. Avrom Novershtern, direktor
Adres: Yiddish Department Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus 91905, Jerusalem
e-mail: nowers@shum.cc.huji.ac.il

The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research, the Yiddish Department of Hebrew
University and Beit Shalom Aleichem are pleased to announce a new initiative
in the field of Yiddish studies: THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH SEMINAR ON
YIDDISH CULTURE, which will be held in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv from June 20th
to July 2nd, 1999. 

The Seminar is intended for graduate students of Yiddish literature and East
European Jewish history and culture. Its purpose is to provide intensive
study with some of the foremost specialists in the field, to enable students
from different countries and research disciplines to become acquainted with
each other, and to familiarize students with the rich resources in Israel
for the study of Yiddish literature and culture. 

ALL INSTRUCTION AND SEMINAR ACTIVITIES WILL BE CONDUCTED IN YIDDISH. 

The core courses will be as follows: 

Mordechai Altshuler (Hebrew University)
"Yiddish Culture in the Soviet Union"

David Fishman (Jewish Theological Seminary and YIVO Institute)
"The Emergence of Modern Yiddish Culture in Eastern Europe"

Samuel Kassow (Trinity College)
"Yiddish Culture in Inter-war Poland"

Anita Norich (University of Michigan)
"Yiddish Literature in the United States"

Avraham Novershtern (Hebrew University and Beit Shalom Aleichem)
"The Works of Sholem Aleichem"

Chava Turniansky (Hebrew University)
"Old Yiddish Literature"

Each course will consist of a series of five academic lectures. In addition,
there will be meetings with Yiddish authors and cultural figures. The
Seminar's first week of classes will take place at Beit Shalom Aleichem in
Tel Aviv, and the second week - on the Mount Scopus Campus of Hebrew
University in Jerusalem. 

Admission is restricted to eighteen participants. Tuition is $300.  Housing
will be provided, free of charge, for participating non-Israeli graduate
students. Stipends are also available to cover a considerable part of
airfare costs. 

There are no formal application forms. Interested graduate students should
submit a letter or E-mail, with a short biography and a description of their
research interests, and a letter of recommendation from a professor. 

The sponsoring institutions envision the Seminar as a training ground for
the next generation of instructors and scholars in Yiddish literature and
culture. It is anticipated that the second seminar will take place in the
United States in 2001. 

Avraham Novershtern

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 6 Feb 1999 09:02:10 -0500 (EST)
From: MSchaecht@aol.com
Subject: shtat

In response to Dovid Herskovits (08.111):

Shtat, tseshtat, shtatalekh, tseshtatalekh zenen nisht ken datshmerizmen,
nor legitime yidishe verter, kusher-veyusher. Zey zenen kharakteristish farn
transkarpatishn yidish: Ingern (Oyberland), Marmerosh, Zimbergn, Slovakay. 
Mestom oukh Burgnland. Far vus di verter zenen vintsik bakant mekhits der
teritorye? Tsilib etlekhe sibes, ober dus i'shoyn akhits a manse. 

Ayer
Mordkhe Schaechter/Motkhe Shekhter

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 07 Feb 99 12:46:41 PST
From: "Jan Jonk" <jjo@ghlyceum.nl>
Subject: yiska

Wer ken far mikh iberzetsn dos vort 'yiska' in der dertseylung 'Tshishn
emigrantn' inem zats: 'un tsu im in hoyz kumt men dokh zeltn. ober men kumt
- men tsolt im gelt in (Shpigl) un (Gekl.verk)' yiska.' In 'David Bergelson,
Geklibene verk Vilne 1928, Bd. 5. p.181 un in ' A shpigl oyf a shteyn, 
Tel Aviv 1964 p.66. 

un in derzelbn geshikhte di verter ' a jak? (...) a tut tova .. zshidew - to
nima? ' inem zats : 

' A jak?- hot er gefregt bay ot dem jungeren un hot gegebn a shmek di luft
mit der nos, - a tut tovo .. zshidew-to nima?' In 'David Bergelson,
Geklibene verk Vilne 1928, Bd. 5. p.184 un in ' A shpigl oyf a shteyn', 
Tel Aviv 1964 p.69. 

A sheynem dank

Jan Jonk
Alphen aan den Rijn.
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.128

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html




