
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.097
December 11, 1998

1) Sholem Aleykehm and frum Yiddish (Larry Rosenwald)
2) Frum Yiddish and Literary Standard (Bruce Mitchell)
3) der yid (Id) laytish oder lebedik (sylvia schildt)
4) "Standard" Yiddish? (Bob Newell)
5) teaching Yiddish like other languages (Sholem Berger)
6) bilingual postings on Mendele (Larry Rosenwald)
7) der tsveyter tog yontef (Noyekh Miller)
8) Mendele ain't jist for beginners (Martin (Moyshe) Horwitz)
9) Mendele languages and statistics (Iosif Vaisman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 12:36:45 -0500 (EST)
From: Larry Rosenwald <LROSENWALD@WELLESLEY.EDU>
Subject: Sholem Aleykehm and frum Yiddish

I was struck by a passage in Yankev Lewis' posting on "Klal-yidish tsvishn
di frume":  "I think there is in particular a disappearance of Slavic
vocabulary.  E.g.  Weinreich gives only words of Slavic origin as
equivalents to "lake" but Der Yid uses the English word. Similarly a Bobov
Hasid in Boro Park told me that the Yiddish word for "supper" is now
"supper" ("soper" in YIVO transliteration) -- and, he said, after all in the
old country people also didn't use "nakhtmol", they used the Polish word,
"vyetshere".  I.e. he didn't see the Slavic word as rooted in Yiddish."

This reminded me of a passage in Sholem Aleykhem's Motl Peysi in Amerike,
where there's a dispute over precisely this word.  Motl Peysi's older
brother Elye, and his friend Pini, are working in a "shap," and come home
tired - "zey kumen ale mol oysgematert un hungerik.  Un mir zetsn zikh esn
vetshere.  Do heyst es 'Saper.' [sic] Brokhe [Elye's wife] hot faynt ot dos
vort, azoy vi an erlekher yid hot faynt khazer"  (they always come home
exhausted and hungry.  And we sit down to eat _vetshere_.  Here it's called
'Saper.' Brokhe hates that word, the way an observant Jew hates pig). This
is only one of the words Brokhe hates - she's equally unfond of "vinde,"
"stakings," "dishes, "spun," and prefers the (sometimes Slavic, sometimes
German) words to these American innovations. 
        
What's weird, really, is that in the SA passage, Brokhe's refusal to use
American vocabulary is part of her resistance to Americanization generally -
whereas the Boro Park Bobover Hasid quoted in Yankev Lewis' posting is a
representative of the group that has surely resisted Americanization in most
ways successfully, however much American vocabulary has infiltrated its
Yiddish.
        
Al dos guts, 
Larry Rosenwald

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 16:34:16 -0500 (EST)
From: Bruce Mitchell <bmitch@sable.ox.ac.uk>
Subject: Frum Yiddish and Literary Standard

Before I address Yiddish orthography in the frum world, I would like to make
a very general observation about Yiddish as it is spoken and written by
non-haredi Jews. Contrary to popular belief, not all contemporary Yiddish
scholars and writers accept YIVO orthography or a puristic form of the
spoken language. There are descriptivists who propose written forms and
vocabulary more in line with the linguistic reality, and there are less
religious Yiddish speakers who liberally lace their Yiddish with all sorts
of Germanisms, Anglicisms, and more seldom words borrowed from Modern
Hebrew. In fact, it is not uncommon to find older speakers who do not know
any German and, being completely oblivious to the post-war fashion of
replacing words deemed "too German" with Hebrew, still use "varshaynlekh"
instead of "mistome", "aynfershtendik" instead of "maskim", and "hayratn"
instead of "khasene hobn".In fact, I met one native speaker from Liverpool
who did not even know what "maskim" meant and constantly needed to have the
word "translated" as "aynfershtendik". So much for the authority of
linguistic purists. As for "popular Yiddish orthography", just about any
editor of Yiddish language texts today can testify to the wide variety of
spellings found even in the comparatively small secular pool of speakers in
the 90s.

If the secular world cannot even enforce one standard orthography without
dissension, then the frum community can hardly be expected to do so either.
In fact, the frum community has several periodicals published by different
groups, with no organization which even intends to establish a common
standard orthography. Although frum Jews are interested in Yiddish as a
language and in a pious Yiddish literature, they are not necessarily
interested in YIVO orthography. Nonetheless, several haredi editors are
struggling to find an acceptable orthographic standard,and it just may be a
matter of time until one actually emerges. With regards to hebraisms,
anglicisms, and germanisms, new words are a sure sign of life and should be
welcomed, not eschewed because of linguistic pretension. 
  
Finally, I would like to introduce "mendelianers" to the scholarly work of a
hasidic linguist, Shmuel Heiley. Yes, he has long peyes, wears a shtrayml on
shabes, and a black hat during the week. No, he is not a bal-tshuve and does
not work at a university. He is simply gifted in languages and has
cultivated his interest in Yiddish to the point where he can conduct
competent scholarly work. I have personally spent shaboysim and yon-toyvim
with him and his rather large family, who speak a beautiful Polish dialect
of Yiddish-none of this standard nonsense. Personal details aside, I am
quoting an excerpt from his article "Solomon A. Birnbaum", because I think
his perspective on Birnbaum's work is both unique and relevant to the
ongoing Mendele discussion. Here it is:

"Birnbaum's View of Yiddish

If there is one central feature which encapsulates Birnbaum's perception of
modern Yiddish, it is his strict adherence to the spoken language, to its
specifics in comparison to cognate or coterritorial languages, and his
refusal to create, adhere to or tolerate a synthetic standard form(on
Solomon Birnbaum's original contribution to the standardization of modern
Yiddish see Schaechter 1955,1962). This stands in stark contrast to the work
of many of his prominent contemporaries whose normativist tendencies were by
and large aimed toward such a standard. 

>From the time he began contributing to Yiddish studies, Birnbaum was
influenced by traditional Jewish values;his life-style (as far as his
surroundings in pre-World War Two Germany permitted) was modelled on that of
Eastern European Jewry, promoting strict adherence to traditional values, in
which Yiddish played a significant part. He thus viewed Yiddish as part and
parcel of a much greater age old framework, which contains the necessary
power to generate its own continuation. Therefore Yiddish, according to
Birnbaum's worldview, was never and end in itself.

In contrast, his colleagues did not share his life-style or views at all.
Having separated themselves from traditional Orthodoxy, or having been born
to parents who had done so, they often failed to see any inherent connection
between Yiddish and Judaism. Having assimilated almost completely into the
dominant society, they viewed Yiddish as the last rallying point for their
identity as Jews. 

This dichotomy of views underlies the widely diverging approaches to the way
in which Yiddish should be promoted. On the one hand, Birnbaum's work is
characterized by an active involvement with a culture, realizing its
millenium-long history, and its potential for preservation, knowing full
well that is has every reasonable chance of a long future ahead. On the
other hand, his contemporaries, while attempting to regard the subject in
terms of a purely academic discipline, and to display a corresponding
academic objectivity and detachment, repeatedly subjected it to the
contemporary philosophies upon which their own lifestyles were subjectively
based.

In Birnbaum's view, the confusion of concepts and emotions in the secular
Yiddishist camp gave rise to the abortive attempt to create a standard
language that was based NOT on the majority of Yiddish speakers but on an
asssumed model of academic prestige..."

Excerpt taken from Shmuel Heiley, "Solomon A. Birnbaum", IN: Dov-Ber Kerler,
ed., "History of Yiddish Studies", Winter Studies in Yiddish, Volume 3.

Bruce Mitchell 

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 13:25:08 -0500 (EST)
From: creativa@charm.net (Sylvia Schildt)
Subject: der yid (Id) laytish oder lebedik

tayere mendelyaner ...

ikh hob nokhgefolgt di rekomendatzie tzu leyenen "der yid" un zikh farshribn
af 1 yor. ot iz ongekumen der numer fun detzember 4 (iber 140 zaytn). vilt
zikh mit di khaverim tzetayln di ershte frishe ayndrukn.

der tam fun yidishkeyt gefint zikh iberal, af yedn blat, afile in di anonsn
- grayzn a sakh, anglitzizmen a sakh veyniker vi in forvertz in di 20-er,
30-er, 40-er, biz nit lang tzurik. 

af english shteyt geshribn "Der Yid" - in Yidish, leygt men dos oys vi in
far-yivo tzaytn in forvertz, vi ba litvishe un rusishe yidn (afile in
sovyetish yidish) shtumer aleph, yud, daled. 

nit azey geferlekh, ven me nemt in batrakht az klal yidish iz a lebedike
shprakh un di mentshn muzn araynnemen inyonim fun hayntzytikn lebn.un yeder
anons oder shrayber tut epes andersh. 

tzum bayshpil: s'iz do an anons vos nemt arayn gantz zayt 27 fun "Lee Avenue
Photo" - halb english, halb yidish. Lee Photo farkeyft kolerley tekhnishe
zakhn, bashribn af english merstns - ober de anons gufe iz azoy yidishlekh
geshmak -- az me ken geshmoltzn vern. eybn iz do a bild fun a teler latkes
un es geyt fun zey a pare. ikh tzitir: 

" Hert un shtoynt ,,,

Elektronishe 'Latkes" ...?! 

Neyn. Elektronishe latkes hobn mir take nisht, ober elektroniks bilig vi
latkes hobn mir yo ...! " 

Un vegn di grayzn un anglitzizmen vil ikh nor makhn eyn bamerkung -- di
lerer mayne fun arbeter ring zaynen eykh geven shtark gegn anglitzizmen in
yidish, ober zey hobn shtark genutzt daytshmerizmen un slavizmen -- fregt
zikh di kashe -- un zikher darf zayn a mos -- mit vos zaynen verter fun
lender vu men hot yidn geharget vi di shof -- mit vos zaynen zayere verter
kosherer vi verter fun a fray land, vu yidn kenen zikh -- tzi frum vi di
satmer, tzi fray vi di sylvies -- oyslebn di yorn in fridn (lomir hofn als
yidn)??? 

ikh hob eyn yor abonirt Birobidjaner Shtern - iz nit nor nit geven kin gefil
fun yidishkey, nor es is faktish geven anti-tzionistish, anti-semitish. Vos
iz beser? 

Efsher darfn mir zikh dernentern vi in di alte tzaytn -- vet klal yidish
vern a bisele mer laytish un laytish yidish a bisele lebediker. 

dear mendelyaner ... 

I followed the recommendation to read "Der Yid" and signed up for a year. 
The issue just came, for December 4 (over 140 pages!). I have the urge to
share my first fresh impressions with my friends. 

The taste of Yiddishkeyt is everywhere, on every page, even in the ads --
lots of mistakes, fewer anglicisms than in the Forward of the 20's, 30's,
40's, until not too long ago. 

In English it's written DER YID -- in Yiddish, they spell it like in the
pre-Yivo days of the Forward, as with Lithuanian and Russian Jews (even in
Sovietish Yiddish) silent aleph, yud, daled. 

Not so terrible, when you take into consideration that klal Yiddish is a
living language and the people have to incorporate subjects of contemporary
life. And every ad or writer does something different. 

For example: there's an ad that occupies all of page 27 from Lee Avenue
Photo ... half English, half Yiddish. Lee Photo sells technical stuff,
described mostly in English - but the ad itself is so deliciously Jewish,
you could melt. Above is a picture of a plate of latkes and steam is coming
from them. I quote: 

" Listen and be amazed. ":  Electronic "Latkes" .. ? ! 

No. Electronic latkes we don't actually have, but electronics as cheap as
latkes, that we do have. " 

And about the mistakes and Anglicisms, , I wish to make just one comment --
my teachers in the Arbeter Ring were also very anti Anglicisms in Yiddish,
but they used lots of Germanisms and Slavicisms. This begs the question --
and of course there has to be some moderation-- with what are words from
countries where Jews were slaughtered like sheep - with what are these more
kosher than words (borrowed) from a free land, where Jews can -- be they
frum as Satmer, or fray as the Sylvias -- live out their years in peace
(let's hope as Jews) ??? 

I once subscribed to Birobidjanaer Shtern for a whole year and found it to
be in truth not only anti-Zionist, but anti-Semitic. What is better? 

Perhaps we need to come closer to each other -- so klal Yiddish can become a
little more respectable -- and respectable Yiddish a little livelier. 

sylvia schildt
baltimore, maryland

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 7 Dec 1998 20:32:59 -0500 (EST)
From: Bob Newell <bnewell@alum.mit.edu>
Subject: "Standard" Yiddish?

I read the last few postings about variants of Yiddish, and as a newcomer to
this list, whose exclusive experience with Yiddish is having read the
Vorverts for seven or eight years: is the Yiddish of the Vorverts considered
"standard" literary Yiddish?  It seems to conform pretty closely to the
textbooks, but as I say, I have no other experience with Yiddish. 

Bob Newell
Los Alamos, New Mexico

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 08:50:42 -0500 (EST)
From: "Sholem Berger" <bergez01@med.nyu.edu>
Subject: teaching Yiddish like other languages 

Yankev Lewis, writing in Mendele 8.096, looks forward to the day (bimheyro
byomeynu, omeyn selo) 

"when Yiddish is considered like any other language, to be studied
accordingly to how it is usually written and spoken by the majority of its
contemporary users." 

Though my experience of language education is from the student's side, I
would venture that most languages are taught in the unrealistic way that
Lewis bemoans, based on a literary standard and kept at some conscious
difference from the spoken language.  For example: most people's first
exposure to Spanish comes in high school, where a field trip to Harlem or
Puerto Rico is far down the list from "La celestina" and "Don Quijote." 

"Victorian Yiddish" may be an easy target, but it's no less prevalent in the
classrooms than Academie French or "Castillian" Spanish. 

Sholem Berger

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 14:13:59 -0500 (EST)
From: Larry Rosenwald <LROSENWALD@WELLESLEY.EDU>
Subject: bilingual postings on MENDELE

On the question of whether Yiddish-language postings on MENDELE always need
to be accompanied by an English translation - I'm inclined to agree with
Hugh Denman that they don't, for a couple of reasons.  1) I certainly don't
read Yiddish as well as I read English, but I'm often likely to learn more
Yiddish if I can't turn to an English translation.  I wish I could resist
the temptation to follow the path of least resistance , but I can't.  2) I'm
in favor of having more postings rather than fewer, and my guess is that the
labor of producing an English translation of a Yiddish posting might deter
some people from posting at all.  3)  This is especially true where the
posters' native language isn't English.  English is a pretty good lingua
franca for this list, but so is Yiddish;  Yiddish isn't just the subject
that MENDELE is devoted to, it is also, here as elsewhere, now as in the
past, a language we have in common, or that we're striving to have in
common, that makes it possible for us to talk among ourselves over the
spaces (linguistic and geographical) that separate English from Russian and
Russian from Spanish and Spanish from Hebrew. 
        
Al dos guts, 
Larry Rosenwald

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 14:52:12 -0500
From: "N. Miller" <nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu>
Subject: der tsveyter tog yontef

It's that time of year again and the matter of transcription is once again
on the table. This time it's led off by Mel Poretz, who proposes (8.093)
that we start using aitches with certain vowels.

    For example, the word for "face" when spelled "punem" misses the mark by
    permitting the new reader to sound it out like the word for "pun" with
    an "em" tagged on at the end. I've often seen it spelled as "poonem" and
    maybe some Yiddish, somewhere, was spoken that way.   Introducing the
    letter "h" gives it the special resonance of "puhnem" where the first
    syllable sounds like "puff" as in taking (nishtduhgedokt) a drag on a
    stogie.  The word for "all" when spelled "ale" rings true to Yiddishists
    who automatically sound it in their mind's ear the way it was spoken by
    our tateh-mamehs, regardless of how the word appears on a printed page
    or screen; but to the uninitiated, at any rate, it could sound like a
    bottle of ale. Finishing the word with the letter "h" gives it the
    Yiddish sound quality it needs, "aleh." When the word for "from" is used
    in the Yiddish, it could read to some like the English word for an
    enjoyable experience and not the Yiddish "fuhn."

He's aware that his proposed rule may not serve the hundreds of Mendele's
readers for whom English is not a primary language:

    Obviously, this does not account for foreign readers who spellings and
    pronunciations might not fit within any such rubric. I'd settle, mit
    gelust, for an Americanized standardization.  Vus zuhgst du?

That's the proposal.  And since we've been invited to "zuhg" what we think,
here's my take.  It's a terrible idea.

The most obvious reason is that we already have an excellent system (YIVO)
that's easy to learn and that works.

http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/library/

And makhn shabes far zikh is, as a friend writes, a waste of everyone's
time.  We're not concerned here, after all, with an orthographic guide for
_English_ books and dictionaries, nor do we normally use Yiddish words in
isolation--except where the reader may be reasonably expected to understand.
If the Yiddish "gas", for instance, might be misconstrued when used alone
(though who would so use it?), surely no one can be misled by "di yidishe
gas".

But there are other aspects of the Poretz plan that bother me a great deal
more than its mere uselessness.  I have in fact three objections which I
hope others will find reasonable as well as a personal quibble that's
possibly unreasonable.

First, it's discriminatory. A "standardization" that would make things more
difficult for "foreign" readers is on the face of it atrocious. All
Mendelists have precisely the same standing.  Mendele is not an "American"
list and no Mendelist is a "foreigner".

Second, and even more basic, it demeans Yiddish.  It betrays a notion of
Yiddish as something less than a language in its own right.  Mr. Poretz
wouldn't dream of asking the French Academy to modify the spelling of "pour"
because American readers might pronounce it wrong.  Or that the German "die"
be respelled.  Yet here he is, implying that English is privileged with
respect to Yiddish: that no Australian reading a Yiddish text should be
expected to do any code-switching. We're not told why. Are Canadian readers
so dumb that they can't figure out for themselves that pronunciation shifts
with the language being used? This proposal is not only a serious insult to
Yiddish, it treats speakers of English none too kindly.

Third, the supererogatory aitch is daytshmerish revisited, a regressive step
to the time nitdogedakht when German occupied the place for some Yiddishists
that English nebekh does today. The result then was a Yiddish orthography
that tried as much as possible to resemble modern German, a Yiddish
bristling with aitches in the form of the hey.  Fighting daytshmerish in all
its forms took a long time (indeed the Forverts has only within the year
adopted the full YIVO standard). It would be a travesty were we to start
that nonsense all over again.  I refuse to believe that Mendelistn can't
approach a transcribed Yiddish text with the same degree of attention as
they do something written in Spanish or Polish.

I mentioned a personal reason.  The unnecessary aitch is mildly annoying at
all times, but when it comes at the _end_ of a word, as in "tateh" or "mameh"
or "aleh", I positively get the jimjams.  It puts me in mind of the raised
little finger that some once thought (still do?) was de rigueur when taking
tea with the Duchess of Kent or whatever.  And Yiddish was not designed for
living it up at the Ritz--except maybe as a subversive vehicle for the Marx
Brothers or S.J. Perelman.  Me, I drink my tea from a mug and I suspect that
most of us on Mendele--Mel Poretz included--do likewise.

A final point.  Nothing in the foregoing should be construed as a personal
attack.  The Internet, wonderful as it is, seems to turn what ought to be
civilized if peppered debate into hair-pulling contests.  The first is
interesting, the latter boring.  Zol zayn lebedik!

Noyekh Miller

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 08:45:42 -0500 (EST)
From: Martin Horwitz <MHorwitz@compuserve.com>
Subject: Mendele ain't jist fer beginners

This is a response to Messrs. Gaston,Gilboa,Ben Litman,Friedman,and
Berkowita and their insistent request that everything be translated because
it is too hard, they are lazy, they just began, they speak but don't read,
they are retired and too lazy to work (!!!??SIC),and any one who does not
cater to them or even urges them to treat the language of nostaligia and
hobby with a bit of respect is a snob or just not helping.  I am not a
native speaker of Yiddish. I learned my Yiddish 35 years ago at a folkshule.
My parents never spoke TO me ,just among themselves while disparaging any
Jew who did not know Yiddish. I relearned Yiddish at the YIVO after a trip
to Russia in 1959 where Yiddish allowed frightened Jews to immediately trust
me and to talk about antiSemitism in the public street. So I returned and
had the pleasure to hear seminars say af idish, say af english fun gelernte,
eydele mentshn vi Miron un Harshavsky vu inem YIVO, a place where scholars,
Bundists, chance students, and serious lovers of Yiddish language and
literature could learn more no matter what their level. But they did not go
around asking that everything be done only for them or to make their life
easier.  So, be careful that you do not drive away those "serious" people
who started Mendele. You do so at your own peril. It may not be here without
them.

Martin (Moyshe) Horwitz

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 17:12:59 -0500 (EST)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: Mendele languages and statistics

In the recent Mendele issues we've seen several opinions regarding posting
translations. Mendele is unlikely to enforce any of the suggestions:  all
messages in Yiddish or English or both languages are equally welcome. 

I think it may be appropriate to remind here that Mendele is a truly
international community. As of today, we have 1,720 subscribers living on
six continents, approximately two thirds of them in the United States. (The
exact numbers are unknown, because it is difficult to attribute correctly
addresses in .com, .net, and .org domains. The numbers below reflect only
the respective country domains -- .ca, .il, .de, .nl, etc. Actual number of
subscribers from some countries is significantly higher).

Canada          73                      Hungary         11
Israel          61                      Italy           10
Germany         45                      Switzerland      9
Netherlands     26                      Japan            7
UK              22                      Poland           7
Australia       17                      Brazil           6
France          12                      Sweden           6
Argentina       11                      Austria          5

Country domains with less than 5 subscribers: Belgium, China, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Hong Kong, Iceland, Luxembourg, Mexico,
New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Uruguay. 

If you subscribed to Mendele and your country is not listed here, please let
me know. I am preparing the Mendele World Map and would like to have
everyone represented. 

Iosif Vaisman
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.097

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



