
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.027
September 9, 1999

1) fishman-fundatsiye dermonung (Joshua Fishman)
2) Abraham Brumberg's article (Bruce Mitchell)
3) Brumberg's article (Anatole Beck)
4) Brumberg on Yiddish/Hebrew (Charles H Fuchsman)
5) Abraham Brumberg's article (Mendy Fliegler)
6) translation help (Jason Payne)
7) Dybbuk stars (Michael Steinlauf)
8) From Haiku to Khaiku (Marjorie/Mirl Schonhaut Hirshan)
9) Yiddish proverb (Harlan Coben)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 5 Sep 1999 11:02:04 -0400 (EDT)
From: Joshua Fishman <jfishman@aecom.yu.edu>
Subject: fishman-fundatsiye dermonung

Proyektn af tsu shtarkn yidish tsvishn kinder un yugnt veln batrkht vern af
der zitsung fun di direktorn fun der fishman-fundatsiye sof oktober.  1999.
Aplikatsiyes in shaykes mit proyektn vos veln zikh onheybn inem nayem yor
(tasha"s/2000) darfn onkumen tsu der fundatsiye (afn nayem adres: 3616 Henry
Hudson parkway, Apt. 7B-N, Riverdale, NY 10463) nit shpeter vi oktober dem
15tn, 1999. Aplikatsiyes muzn zayn af yidish un muzn bagleyt vern durkh a
genoyem budzshet fun nit mer vi $2000. Men ken zikh vendn tsu bakumen a
kontrolirke ("check-list") fun di foderungen fun der fundatsiye baym
durkhkukn aplikatsiyes. 

Joshua Fishman 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 29 Aug 1999 17:39:44 -0400 (EDT)
From: Bruce Mitchell <bmitch@sable.ox.ac.uk>
Subject: Abraham Brumberg's article

Abraham Brumberg mentions in his article regarding the history of polemics
surrounding the use of Yiddish vs. Hebrew that Ladino has "virtually no
surviving speakers" and further that it has almost no literary merit
(Mendele Vol. 09.024).

In fact, there are several thousand speakers of "Ladino", also called
Judeo-Spanish and Judezmo in academic circles, both in Israel and the
diaspora. Centres such as Bat-Yam, Netanya, and Jerusalem are an
uncontestable fact in Israel, while there are approximately 19,000 speakers
in Turkey, and between one and two thousand in Greece. One can also find
small groups of speakers in France, Belgium, and the United States, Seattle
in particular.

As for "Ladino" having no literary merit, I must again object.  Matilda Coen
Sarano, a contemporary Ladino author residing in Jerusalem, has recently
authored several anthologies of Sephardic stories, composed orginal poetry,
and written a musical icomedy which was staged in Ladino in Mexico City just
two years ago. There is also an amateur Ladino theatre in Bat-Yam which, in
many ways, is more vibrant than the Yiddish version in Tel-Aviv. Various
dramatists (Sarah Benveniste Benrey, R. Anach, et alia) have composed new
plays to be staged in recent years and continue to do so. The same troupe
stages Ladino versions of contemporary Hebrew and French comedies. This
company sells over two thousand tickets per season. I cannot even list in
this brief email the various poets in Turkey, Israel, and elsewhere. For a
more in depth discussion of contemporary Ladino culture, I suggest reading
my last three articles on the topic in the quarterly "Los Muestros" (Di
Unzere),numbers 33, 34, and 35, which are available on line at
(www.sefarad.org).

As for Ladino not being suppressed to the same extent as Yiddish in the
early years of the Zionist state, this is quite accurate. However, this is
no longer the case. While Yiddish is a subject studied in Israeli secondary
schools, there is to date only one religious all-girls school in the entire
country which offers Ladino as a language, despite it's tenaciously vibrant
culture. Where is the funding from the Israeli government for Ladino
programs in areas with large populations of Jews from Turkey and Greece?
Yiddish certainly has it in many locations, not that I think Yiddish funding
is by any means sufficient. 

I trust that Abraham Brumberg is well meaning in his appraisal of Ladino,
but he needs to revise a few facts before making such sweeping proclamations
about the language. In his defense, I can only say that some people have
even been awarded doctorates in "Ladino" and made similar factual
oversights. One dissertation in particular, dated 1979, claims that, despite
repeated efforts, no speakers under twenty years of age could be found
(University if Michigan awarded this doctorate, I believe).  In 1998, I
found more than a few speakers under twenty, and dozens more who would
have
been around or under twenty years of age in 1979 (for a clearly documented
example, check the children of Matilda Coen Sarano, all under forty years
old, two of which are fluent in Ladino while another has only partial
competence). This is truly a sad state of affairs in academia. 

Yiddish

Regarding Brumbergs statements about efforts to keep Yiddish alive, I must
point out that any efforts at keeping Yiddish alive pale in comparison with
all the concerted efforts made to kill it off as quickly as possible. This
notwithstanding, Dovid Katz makes clear in his article in the July 6th
edition of the Forverts, that there are indeed a good many authors who still
write in Yiddish, but they are systematically overlooked in the
Anglo/American Jewish press.  Perhaps if more Yiddish speakers looked at
what remains of Yiddish culture instead of bemoaning its demise, there would
be a much more vibrant Yiddish language readership. 

Then there is the sad fact that the Sokhnut (please correct my
transliteration if it is faulty) is actively discouraging the propagation of
Yiddish in the former Soviet Union. On this point, I wholeheartedly agree
with Brumberg. During my recent visit to Vilna, I was sickened by the way in
which the Israeli goverment bribes Lithuanian Jews not to teach Yiddish in a
school called "Sholem Aleichem". Teach Yiddish as a living language, which
it still is in Vilna among Jews over forty, and the school gets no funding.
TO my knowledge, however, the school isn't even teaching Yiddish as a dead
language, but as an extra-curricular activity, which amounts to nothing
substantial.

Finally, I would like to take issue with the "except for the
ultra-orthodox". That is a BIG, and I mean BIG "except". We are talking
about hundreds of thousands of speakers, the most vibrant Yiddish press in
the world, a thriving literature for children, and much more. Sadly enough,
"except for the ultra-orthodox" is becoming a lieu commun in articles
dealing with the current state of Yiddish (none of which Brumberg quotes).
If I spoke about German in America, for example, I might say that "except
for the Mennonites, the Amish (alias the Pennsylvania Dutch), and small
communities of German speakers in rural Texas, German is dead in America". 
Indeed, if I systematically excluded all of those groups who currently use
German in America today, I could very safely say "German is dead in
America". Very unfortunately indeed, such is the current state of discourse
when discussing Yiddish, Ladino, and other Jewish vernaculars of the
diaspora. I am just glad I still have enough of a taste for the absurd that
I can still laugh between tears. 

Bruce Mitchell
  
3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 1999 08:03:16 -0400 (EDT)
From: Anatole Beck <beck@math.wisc.edu>
Subject: Brumberg's article

The excellent report by Abraham Brumberg gives a good overall insight into
the struggle between Hebrew and the language which I had always called
Jewish until the Zionists campaigned against that usage in the late 1940s. 
(It is still called Juif in France, e.g.)  The venom which was heaped upon
it and its culture by the Zionists has always offended me, but as an
indicator of motivation, let me point out that they have always also poured
their scorn upon Ashkenazic Hebrew.  The pretense that the proponents of
"modern Hebrew" were concerned to have a language which would encompass
the
Sephardim as well is clearly belied by the atrocious way in which the racist
European majority in Israel have treated the Jews from the Magrebh, from
Yemen, from India, and from Ethiopia.  It is manifest from the practice of
the chalitzim that the purpose of the new accent was to create psychological
distance between themselves and their despised cousins who had not taken up
the same Cause. 
  
As Chaver Brumberg notes, the slighting of Yiddish (as opoposed to e.g. 
Ladino) continues to this day.  I have noted that we now have at least 2
generations of American Jews who feel closer to King David than to their own
great-grandparents.  The contempt for the Yiddish Laguage (which
post-biblical Hebrew cannot match in literature and culture) and its people
(on the part of the Israelis) is greater than the residue of antiSemitism we
can still detect in the Western democracies.  For those who hold me and mine
in comtempt, but still demand my support in various ways, I have only short
Saxon explitives.  I should be above such petty annoyances.  Perhaps I
should have learned from an ancient Jewish carpenter of Nazareth to turn the
other cheek, but I still find it difficult. 
  
As one of the few native speakers of my language left on the earth, I thank
Chaver Brumberg on behalf of all the Jews of the Golos (not galot)  and add
my voice to his, with perhaps a touch more vitriol. 

Anatole Beck.

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 1999 18:36:17 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Charles H Fuchsman" <charles.fuchsman@gte.net>
Subject: Brumberg on Yiddish/Hebrew

 1. Does Brumberg overstate the Bund role in the flowering if Yiddish
culture? The Bund was founded in 1897, by which time Mendele Mokher Sforim
had published virtually all his Yiddish writings, and Sholem Aleikhem and
I.L.Peretz were well-known authors.  Of course, some Bund leaders, like
Khaim Zhitlovski and Vladimir Medem, were champions of Yiddish, and were
great exemplars in their writings and speeches.  But the Bund appears to
have used Yiddish opportunistically rather than to have provided an engine
of cultural growth. 

 2. Does Brumberg underestimate the growth of Yiddish literature and culture
in the Soviet Union?  Most of the prominent Soviet Yiddish writers (except
for Itzik Fefer) had achieved reputations as creative writers before 1917.
(E.g. Peretz Markish and David Hofshtein).  Some had left Russia during the
Civil War years, for Germany and Poland, but soon returned to Russia. Their
writing draw on authentic Jewish tradition.  During the 1920's, there was a
real efflorescence in Soviet Yiddish culture: secular Yiddish-language
schools; journals, large editions of books by classic and contemporary
Yiddish authors; Yiddish translations of works by Shakespeare, Tolstoi,
Dickens, Hugo.  With the antisemitism manifest in the 1930's this all came
to an end, and many writers were subsequently imprisoned and killed.  But to
regard them as Communist toadies, of "unconditional fealty to the Third
Rome" is gratuitous and undeserved. 

 3.  Was the Ashkenazic pronunciation of Hebrew words used in Yiddish a
factor in the Israeli proscription of Yiddish? With the arbitrary
sanctification of Spanish (Sfardi) Yikhes for Jewish culture, even prayer in
Ashkenazic Hebrew became objectionable. 

Charles Fuchsman

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 3 Sep 1999 22:41:39 -0400 (EDT)
From: Mendy Fliegler <zemms@netkonnect.net>
Subject: Abraham Brumberg's article

Es dakht zikh mir az Khaver Brumberg hot uns gegebn a sheyne geshikhte vegn
Yidish, der Bund, un di Tsionistn, un hot fargesn di literaturishe oytsers.
Nor er hot es geshribn in English! Farvos nisht in Yidish, du, oyf
'Mendele'? 

Un ikh denk az er hot gemakht a groysn toes. Mir hobn shoyn gezen sheyne
maynses fun di vos viln bagrobn Yidish, mentshn vi Ruth Wisse, un andere, az
Yidish geyt unter (un nokh amul)....Es kukt oys az Khaver Brumberg vil take
fargesn fun di rizikeYidish shraybers, Sholem Aleykhem, Mendele, Y.L.Perets,
Avum Rayzn, Leyvik, un andere? Un vos hot pasirt az men zol avekvarfn di
khevre fun Rusland, oyf zeyr yortsayt, di vos Stalin hot zey oysgeharget?
Vos iz der mer mit zeyere shafungen? 

Un efsher nokh a pur verter vegn : vi azoy Yidish leybt oyf? Efsher ken
Khaver Brumberg uns dertseln vifil universitetn in der velt hobn programen
far profesorn, di vos lernen zayere lerers in Yidishe inyonim? Un efsher a
bisl mer vegn generale Yidishe inyonim vos khapn zikh oyf?? Er muz dokh
visn, az du in Vashington,DC iz di greste 'Tog Shule', Charles E. Smith, di
greste in land,vos lernt di kinder Yidish, zey zoln kenen redn mit Yidn in
Poyln un Rusland, ven zey forn oyf zeyr yorlekher rayze kayn Eyrope.....Un
azoy vayter.... 

Ot iz a poeme vos ikh hob geshribn farayorn: 

'Kapn, Kapn, Kapn'

Herts oys--
Amol nokh a gutn regn,
Ven s'hot zikh gereynikt--
Afile di luft?
Un es blaybt dokh tropn--
Vos kapn, kapn, kapn.

Azoy iz dos lebn,
Mit krankhayt, gezunt
Mit a shturm, pamelekh-
Mit freyd un mit troyer--
Es loyft, un az nisht--
Vi tropn--
Kapn, kapn, kapn

Oykh iz dos Yidish,
Mit pintelekh vekn...
Grine likhtelekh tropn:
Kapn, kapn, kapn

Ober herts oys, es vakst hekher!
//Kapn, KAPN, KAPN//
Es shvebt a khvalye mit oytsers
fun oysyes,
Mit vetlakh un vitsn,
Iber der velt!
Es roysht naye doyres--
Vos vekn oyf  Yidish...
Nisht mer, kapn, kapn, kapn
Un ir veyst vos?
Zey khapn zikh oyf!!
Hey, derekh erets--di Khevre...
Mendele, Sholem Aleykhem, un YLPeretz...
H.Leyvik, Anski,
Yosl Mlotek... un mer...
Zey khapn zikh oyf, un SHRAYEN:
"Hert oys, ratevet Yidish!
Muzt khapn di tropn
fun zilber un gold--
Diamantkelekh Yidish!
Dem Loshn fun Folg"
(Un mir hern zey)

Naye vortslen kumen,
Un es vert mikoyim,
Naye pintelekh Yidish--
In Bikher-
In Lider-
Un Yidishe klangen hern zikh...
Un men hert nisht--
Kapn, kapn, kapn.

Mendy Fliegler

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 30 Aug 1999 14:37:34 -0400 (EDT)
From: jason payne <itsikbenavrom@netscape.net>
Subject: translation help

Dear Mendelniks--

I've come across a couple of things from a Sholem Aleichem text that I cannot
figure out. Can you help?

 1. When describing a desk, Rabinovitsh mentions the "shmoktelyakes" on the
desk. Anyone know what they are? 

 2. Is there an idiomatic Yiddish expression/folksaying that deals with
having the "naynyerike kadokhes"? 

 3. I'm working on the assumption that "dult mir a spodek" is to nudge or
pester, probably a lot like "hakn mayn tssaynik." Anyone know the origin of
"dulen a spodek"? 

Any help appreciated.

Thanks,
Jason Payne

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 3 Sep 1999 13:01:27 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Michael Steinlauf" <msteinlauf@earthlink.net>
Subject: Query: Dybbuk stars

In the original production of the Dybbuk, which opened in Warsaw in December
1920, the lovers were played by Miriam Orleska (1900?-1942) and Alyosha
(Eliohu) Shtayn (189?-194?). The dates are according to Zilbertsvayg's
Leksikon. Can any khosheve Mendelyaner do any better? 

A sheynem dank foroys,

Michael Steinlauf
Philadelphia, Pa.

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 7 Sep 1999 12:18:44 -0400 (EDT)
From: Marjorie Hirshan <marj@hirshan.com>
Subject: From Haiku to Khaiku or what would Sholem Aleichem say?
         
A Contest for Mendele

The Forward (in FastForward August 13) reviewed David Bader's new book
_Haikus for Jews_. 

Remaining true to haiku form - 3 lines and 17 syllables - Mr. Bader mocks
Jewish stereotypes, documents fantasies, is irritable with Jewish kvetching,
which 'gives rise to an irreverent and relentlessly secular Jewish-American
sensibility.'

I found myself wondering what Sholem Aleichem would say. It mirrors our
khutzpa, and makes us laugh at ourselves, iz es shoyn mstame gut far yidn...
Some examples: 

    Cherry blossoms bloom.
          Sure it's beautiful, but is
               it good for the Jews?
  
    No fins, no flippers,
          the gefilte fish swims
               with some difficulty.
  
        In the ice sculpture
              reflected bar mitzvah guests
                   nosh on chopped liver.

        Heimlich. Is that a
               Jewish name? I wonder, as
                   a diner turns blue.   
    
                  Is one Nobel Prize
                        so much to ask from a child
                             after all I've done?
  
                      Five thousand years a
                            wandering people -- then we
                                 found the cabanas.
  
                     Looking for pink buds
                          to prune back, the mohel tends
                                  his flower garden.

                       Monarch butterfly
                           I know your name used to be
                                  Catterpillarstein.

How about some Mendele Khaikus in mameloshn? A contest?

                      Oysielekh vern verter
                            makhn zatsn - mendele
                                neshome
A life-time free subscription to Mendele to all entrants.

Marjorie/Mirl Schonhaut Hirshan
Boynton Beach, Florida

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 8 Sep 1999 15:18:15 -0400 (EDT)
From: Bolitar@aol.com
Subject: Yiddish proverb

Perhaps you can help me.  My name is Harlan Coben.  I'm a novelist and I'm
trying to track down the origins of a Yiddish proverb I once heard.  In
English: "When a father gives to his son, they both laugh.  When a son gives
to his father, they both cry." 

Do you by any chance know who originally said this or is it merely credited
as a Yiddish proverb?  Thank you very much for your time. 

Best,
Harlan Coben
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.027

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



