
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 88
November 4, 1992
 
1) Galitsianer (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 01 Nov 92 13:26:21 IST
From: leonard <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: galitsianer

NOTE:  For some time now I have been trying to understand
why _galitsianer_ (is this the preferred transcription, or
should we palatalize and write _galitsiyaner_ or
galitsyaner_?) have the reputation(s) they do and I am
still not altogether satisfied with what I have uncovered.
 
I am familiar with the stereotypes Ellen Prince mentions
("ignorant," "fanatic," "primitive"), but not her fourth one
("dirty").  I know that in certain contexts, all Ost-Juden
were called "dirty" and that this has often been a part of
antisemitic stereotypes generally.
 
In a talk I recently gave in Galicia I grappled with the
question of what "Galician-ness" consists of both from
within and without.  Noyekh Miller has kindly agreed to
excerpt the relevant passages from my talk (which will be
published in its entirety in Poland in 1993).   L.P.
 
(This paper will appear in a volume devoted to the confer-
ence on Galicia. It will be published in Poland in 1993.)
 
"On the Way to Modern Galician-Jewish Cultural and Political
History: The Cases of Mordecai Gebirtig, Ignacy Schiper and
Dov Sadan"
              by Leonard Prager (University of Haifa)
 
 
A Paper Read at the International Conference on Galicja i
Jej Dziedzictwo ('Galicia and Its Heritage'), Rzeszow,
Poland, 14-18 September 1992.
 
In 1934, twenty-two years after settling in the United
States, the Krakow-born Hebrew and Yiddish journalist and
author, Gershom Bader, published the first half of a Hebrew
biographical dictionary entitled _Medina vachachameha_,
which literally means 'a country and its scholars'.(1)  The
'country' to which Bader referred was not Poland.  The
English title page makes this clear: "Galician Jewish
Celebrities; An illustrated Cyclopaedia of noted Jewish
Personalities, who contributed to Galicia's Progress during
its existence."  The author was piqued into compiling this
work by the superior attitude shown by Russian-Jewish
intellectuals towards their Galician fellows, an attitude
which had found popular expression in malicious descriptions
of _galitsianer_, as Galician Jews were, sometimes disparag-
ingly, sometimes teasingly, called.
 
Bader hoped his work would serve as a memorial to "our
homeland, which for long was a tower of light for Tora and
Knowledge, and which has now ceased to be a political unit
in itself."  The last phrase, as well as the words "during
its existence" in the English subtitle, dispassionately
acknowledges a change in sovereignty.  What does not seem to
have changed, however, even for the emigre author, is his
-- and the word is his -- _galitsiyut_ 'Galician-ness.'  Can
we possibly define that elusive constellation of qualities,
traits, predispositions, attitudes, sensibilities which
'Galician-ness' has meant to Jews in the past, to native
sons and daughters as well as to others, and which it
continues to mean in the post-Shoa present?
 
In the relatively sparse Yiddish genre of travel writing, we
find a 1926 book by Khayim Shoshkes with a chapter on
Galicia. (2)  Shoshkes asks (p. 311): "Vu hoybt zikh eygntl-
ekh on galitsye?"  ('Where does Galicia actually begin?')
And he replies: "Ikh veys -- ir vet zogn, az dort tsvishn
Krashnik un Rozvadov, oder tsvishn Sosnovits un Kroke, vu
s'hot zikh getsoygn der amoliker estraykhisher grenits-pas.
('You'll probably say it starts betwen Krasnik and Rozwadow
or between Sosnowiec and Krakow, where the former Austrian
border stretched.')  But there is a better answer: "... ikh
zog as der bester bavayz dertsu, ven mir zenen aroysgeforn
fun kroyn-poyln, iz der gezeml yidn af der stantsye un
zeyere hitelekh oder kopelushn: ven ir zet, lemoshl unzere
akheynu bney yisroel un afn shpits kop ba zey dos kleyninke
khsidishe hitele (eygntlekh alt-holendish), zent ir nokh in
"kongresuvke"; ven ober es hoybn aykh on shvindlen in di
oygn rabonishe shtraymlekh (eygntlekh alt-shlakhtishe hit)
mit gekrayzlte lange peyes -- zent ir shoyn in galitsye.  Ot
dos iz der emeser simen muvek; ir farshport afile araynkukn
in a geografish bikhl."  As long as you see Jews wearing
little chasidic caps, you are still in Congress Poland, but
when you begin seeing fur hats and long braided earlocks,
then you are in Galicia -- this key is better than a map.
 
Shoshkes goes on to say that: "Mir veysn do, ba unz, azoy
veynik vegn galitsye, az oftmol gloybn mir di informatsyes,
vos viln unz aynredn, az di yidishe bafelkerung dort
bashteyt fun dray shikhtn: belzer khsidim, tshortkover
khsidim un advokatishe doktoyrim, ober dos iz befeyresh
nisht ingantsn rikhtik."  ('We know so little about Galicia
that we often believe the common talk that divides its Jews
into three groups, Belz chasidim, Tshortkov chasidim and
lawyers with doctorates -- which is surely not completely
correct.')
 
We are then reassured that in addition to these three
groups, Little Poland has several hundred thousand ordinary
Jews who are no better or worse than are all the other Jews
in the Polish republic. ("... nor oyser di oybndermonte
shikhtn bavoynen kleyn-poyln oykh a sheyne por hundert
toyznt stam-yidn nisht ergere un nisht besere, vi in
der gantser poylisher republik.") (3)
 
The notion that Galician Jews were distinct in dress,
speech, and manners was surely not fanciful. The character-
ological traits ascribed to Galician Jews, however, are
often no more than comic -- or bigoted -- invention.  Among
the definitions for _galitsianer_ in the leading Israeli
dictionary of spoken Hebrew, we find 1) one who comes from
Galicia, 2) an affectionate expression for a shrewd person
who can squeeze out of tight spots, 3) a person who is
cutting in speech and knows how to talk his way out of
things', ex. 'This Arab, he's a 100% Galician.'  4) a
schemer and trouble-maker. (4) It is not uncommon to find
the attribution of cunning linked to dubious business
practices, the sort of remark an antisemite might make about
any Jew.
 
In a novel by the Israeli writer David Shahar, a main
character sees Red Ear, a Galician Jew, as "a man with two
unusual qualities: he was both a shopkeeper and a Galician.
She considered all shopkeepers thieves.... All Galicians
were born crooks." (5)  Galician Jews are also widely
associated with humor, both as wits and as somehow
laughable in themselves.  It is no accident that there are
so many Yiddish jokes about _galitsianer_ (6) and so many
Yiddish musical comedies with a Galician address in the
title. (7)  The critic Shmuel Rozhanski has described
Moyshe Nadir, one of the best comic stylists in Yiddish, as
"efsher der galitsianishster shrayber fun der yidisher
literatur.  Leytsones un voylyungerishkeyt zaynen zayne
kharikteristishe shtrikhn."  ('perhaps the most Galician
writer in Yiddish literature.  Humor and playfulness are
his most characteristic qualities.')
 
There  are at least a half dozen Yiddish writers who used
the name Galitsianer as a pseudonym, and one who wrote
under the name Kemat a galitsyaner ('Almost a Galician') --
perhaps because he felt he lacked whatever it was that the
true Galician had. ( 9)  So we see that among fellow
Galician Jews, to be a _galitsianer_ is honorific.  Used by
non-Galician Jews it could be either a playful or a
stereotypical cognomen for someone seen as too clever or
too smug.  One theory holds that the greater security and
better education of Galician Jewry made them seem
self-satisfied to their co-religionists under the heel of
the Czars.  Another view holds that their religious
learning seemed superficial to the highly intellectual
Lithuanians.  For these reasons, for which there was
perhaps a small kernel of truth, and others for which there
was none at all, the Galician Jew's sobriquet, _galitsianer_,
became more than a neutral term denoting geographical
origin.
 
It is thus not surprizing that Jewish Galicians have often
complained that they have not been adequately understood by
other Jews.  Dr. Jacob Zineman scored his compatriots in
France and elsewhwere for not doing enough to make known the
contribution of Galician Jewry "in dem geshikhte fun natsio-
naler uflebung un banayung" ('in the history of the Jewish
national awakening and renewal') and for not fulfilling
their duty to their forefathers who in the course of centu-
ries created "dem gvaldikn gaystikn un moralishn oytser fun
galitsishn yidntum" ('the tremendous spiritual and moral
treasure of Galician Jewry')(10).
 
But if, as the apologetic literature suggests, Jewish
Galicians have regarded themselves as insufficiently under-
stood by other Jews, what can be said for their image in the
eyes of Gentile Poles?  The Polish-Jewish sociologist,
Alexander Hertz, among others, has argued that Jewish Poland
generally was an unknown territory to non-Jewish Poles. "...
authentic Jewish life in Poland," Hertz writes, "has found
no reflection either in journalism or in literature.  Until
the end of their existence on Polish soil, the life of the
Jews was a terra incognita.  Objectively speaking, it could
easily have been studied.  In a few instances it was studied
by men of science, mostly Jewish.  On the whole, however, in
Polish society the knowledge of the Jewish world was aston-
ishingly minuscule, fragmentary, and, most frequently,
distorted."(11)
 
But if Polish Gentiles wrote little about Jewish Galicia,
the Jews on the other hand not only wrote about this region,
but in the writings of at least one great writer, the Noble
Laureate Shmuel Yosef Agnon, Galicia and especially the town
of Buczacz (playfully altered in his fiction to Szybusz,
from Hebrew for 'muddle'), became symbolic setting of
immense resonance.  No serious critic of Agnon fails to
stress the importance of Buczacz in the life and art of
Agnon.  One of Israel's most distinguished critics, Gershon
Shaked, in his book on Agnon (dedicated to "the memory of
the victims and survivors of {his} ancestor's Galician
shtetl -- Belz") writes: "Buczacz was for Agnon a vivid
memory, and it became the prototype of the _shtetl_ in his
works.  His relationship with his birthplace came both from
actual recollections and from the image that he formed of
the town after leaving.  The conflict between his memories
and that image is what gives his works their depth....
Buczacz never disappears from Agnon's works." (12).
 
Galicia as symbol, setting or background is hardly less
important in Yiddish literature than in Hebrew literature.
The great Yiddish balladist, Itsik Manger, writes in the
introduction to his charming _Medresh itsik_: "Der geniter
leyener vet zikh khapn, az di landshaft, in velkher di
khumesh-geshtaltn bavegn zikh, iz nisht di kenanishe, nayert
a slavishe.  Ikh hob getrakht vegn der mizrekh-galitsisher.-
...  Di dozike landshaft mit ire verbes paze veg, ire
vaynshl-seder un ire modne shtile demerungen, tsitert in
mayn zikorn fun gor di frieste kinder-yorn."  (The skilful
reader will see that the landscape in which the Bible
characters move is not Canaanite, but Slavic.  I had in mind
eastern Galicia....  This landscape, with the willow trees
along its  roads, its cherry orchards, its strangely quiet
twilights, has trembled in my memory from my earliest
childhood years."  (13)
 
Elsewhere the poet explicitly names childhood memories of
Galicia as the wellspring of his lyrical power: "Ikh hob
shoyn oysgeforn a velt, gevandert un gevoglt af a sakh vegn
fun der velt, nor ka shum veg hot zikh nisht azoy
arayngezunken in mayn gemut vi der veg fun tsvishn
stoptshet un kolomey.  Ot di por mayl vos farbindn dos
mizrekh-galitsishe shtetele mit der 'shtot mit yidn', vi
Shloyme Bikl ruft on kolomey, zenen gevorn _lid_." ('I have
traveled the  world over, have wandered along many a road,
but none has so entrenched itself in my memory as the road
from Stoptshet to Kolomey.  Those few miles which join the
eastern-Galician village with the 'town of Jews', as Shlomo
Bikel called Kolomey, became 'song'). (14)
 
Manger as critic, writing about the aforementioned Moyshe
Nadir discusses the role of his birthplace in his life and
work and concludes: "Narayev iz a likhtiker punkt af der
mape fun der yidisher literatur."  ('Narayev is a point of
light on the map of Yiddish literature.') (15)  For Nadir,
Narayev served as a refuge to which he could turn for relief
from an often cruel and impersonal urban America.  Jewish
life has virually ended in Galicia, but in the pages of
Jewish literature it lives on forever.
 
If nostalgia was a major ingredient in Jewish writing about
Galicia when Jewish life still thrived there, it naturally
became uppermost following the mass destruction of Galician
Jewry by the Nazis.  The elegiac tone, as in the following
lines by Yoysef Tenenboym, becomes dominant: _Galitsye_,
mayn alte heym -- vos fara gefiln dos dervekt! Vifl tsertle-
khkeyt, libe, benkenish un heymvey.  Afile ven men veyst az
khorev iz dos land, a land on yidn, on a haynt un on a
morgn, farklemt dos harts un es flamert di neshome nokhn "a
heym" fun amol.  Vos vister un akhzariesdiker es iz di
khorve fun haynt, alts hekher un loyterer geyt of der simbol
funem nekhtn.  Nisht di tsayt un nisht di brutale virklekhk-
eyt zenen imshtand tsu farvishn dem regnboygn fun nisht
derkholemte khaloymes, oder tsu tseraysn dem geflekht fun
nisht derdakhte gedanken un di nisht dergreykhte hasoges fun
di yunge yorn. Dos zenen lebedike gayster -- di gayster fun
lebn, vos shvebn iber di kupes ash un lozn zikh nisht
farveyen fun beyze vintn -- nakete, shtume neshomelekh vos
zukhn a guf, a vort, an oys vos zol zey gebn forem un
oysdruk.  Ot di galitsye lebt...." ('Galicia, my old home --
what feelings you awake!  What tenderness, love, longing and
homesickness.  Even though one knows that the land is laid
waste, a land without Jews, without a present and a future,
the heart is shaken, the soul yearns for 'a home' that was.
The more desolate and cruel the wasteland of the present,
the higher and clearer rises the symbol of what was.
Neither time nor brutal reality can wipe out the rainbow of
undreamt dreams, or destroy the web of unimagined thoughts
and unrealized achievements of our youth.  These are living
spirits -- the spirits of life, which hover over ash heaps
and will not be dispersed by evil winds -- naked, dumb souls
which seek a body, a word, an outlet to give them form and
expression. This Galicia lives....') (16).
 
Here is a former resident of Rzeszow (Reyshe in Yiddish),
writing from Washington after the Shoa, from which he
evidently was spared: "Reyshe, di yidishe shtot reyshe vu es
hot geblit dos yidishe lebn.  Reyshe, di shtot fun rabonim,
rebeyim, geonim ugdoylim vu es hot geblit der khasidizm,
Reyshe, vu der yid hot farnumen dem oybn-on politish un
ekonomish.  Reyshe, vu yidn hobn geboyt dem handl un indust-
ri.  Reyshe, di shtot fun maskilim, zhurnalistn un shriftsh-
teler.  Reyshe, vu der yid hot gelebt gliklekh, fray fun
efntlekhe antisemitishe diskriminatsyes, Reyshe, vu es hot
geblit der tsienizm." ('Rzeszow, the Jewish town of Rzeshow
where Jewish life flourished. Rzeszow, the town of rabbis
and scholars, where chasidism flourished. Rzeszow, where
Jews were paramount in politics and commercial life. Rzesz-
ow, where Jews built the commerce and the industry.  Rzesz-
ow, the city of maskilim ('enlightened' liberal intelligen-
tsia), journalists and writers.  Rzeszow, where Jews lived
well, free of open antisemitic discrimination.  Rzeszow,
where Zionism flourished.')
 
In the body of this typically nostalgic essay, the author
seems to be referring mainly to the Austro-Hungarian period,
but the opening paragraph here cited appears to include the
later Polish period as well. (17)
 
There are also those ex-Galicians who look back on Galicia,
not with longing, but with recrimination.  The poet Meyer
Shtiker, born in Boyberik around 1900, but in the United
States from 1920 has written a bitter sonnet "Vos nokh bin
ikh dir shuldik, poyln"? ('What More Do I Owe You, Poland?')
which doubtless expresses how many ex-Galicians view their
former homeland -- as a land of incessant and heartless
discrimation against Jews. (18)
 
However, in the vast memorial literature on Galicia written
by ex-Galicians in Hebrew and Yiddish, recrimination and
nostalgia generally intermingle, though in varying propor-
tions.
 
Here, for example, is how a former resident of Skole
looks back on Jewish life there after World War I:  "Nokhn
blutikn krig hot zikh dos andersh geshtaltikt unter der
fray-tsehulyeter polyakn-makht mit ir has tsu un redifes af
yidn, materndik zikh in noyt un in teglekher shrek, ober
oykh mit shabes un yontefdike hofnungen, biz tsum onrukn fun
fintstern khurbn...."  ('After the bloody war things changed
under the unrestrained Polish regime with its hatred and
persecution of Jews, who toiled in great need and in daily
dread, yet with Sabbath and Holiday hopes, till the dark
descent of the Shoa....') (19)  This account by an unsophis-
ticated individual essentially parallels the way most Jewish
historians, though with different emphases, view Jewish life
in Poland under the second Polish Republic, namely that it
combined imposed suffering with great inner resourcefulness
and creativity.  All historians of interwar Poland, includ-
ing of course, Galicia, agree that Jewish life in that
period was intensely dynamic.  Where most Jewish historians
of the period disagree with their Polish colleagues is over
the tangled question of how antisemitic Poland at that time
was.  I find Ezra Mendelsohn's conclusions responsible,
judicious and balanced. He writes: "... interwar Poland was
an anti-semitic country, both in its policies and in the
attitudes of large sections of the Polish population.  The
depth of Polish anti-semitic feeling fluctuated, and histo-
rians will continue to argue both over its extent and its
impact on the Jewish population."  (20)  Mendelsohn doesn't
believe that this antisemitic policy was inevitable.  A
crucial factor was the belief of the Polish elite that a
nation-state could not absorb non-Polish elements, including
the Jews.  Mendelsohn also stresses what Jews owe the Poles,
especially the freedom to open schools, take part in poli-
tics, and write as they wished.
 
"Polish freedom," he writes, "allied with Polish antisemitsm
and Jewish modernization, made possible the emergence and
popularization of the new Jewish politics, which, among
other things, helped to build the state of Israel....
Interwar Poland was a relatively free country, a highly
nationalistic country, and an anti-Jewish country.  The
experience of Polish Jews between the wars was a combination
of suffering, some of which was caused by antisemitism, and
of achievment, made possible by Polish freedom, pluralism
and tolerance.  Modern Polish nationalism led, inevitably,
to antisemitism, but it also inspired Polish Jewish youth to
raise the banner of Jewish nationalism." (21)
 
 
Leonard Prager (Haifa)

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.88

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu
                          or
                 mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

If your node is Bitnet-only and is not connected to the Internet,
please send your message to:

                 mendele@trincc
                          or
                 mendele@yalevm

If you want to discuss personal business or have a shmues with
the shames, please write to:

                 nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu
                          or
                 nmiller@trincc

Please sign your articles.
 
