
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.051
January 11, 2000

1) EYDES project (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 2000 17:29:30 -0500 (EST)
From: "mikhl herzog" <mherzog@bestweb.net>
Subject: EYDES project

I expect that the following will be of considerable interest to Mendele
subscribers who are interested in the language, culture, and history of
Ashkenazic Jewry. My colleagues and I will be pleased to respond to any
questions that may arise therefrom. Questions may be directed to
mherzog@bestweb.net or to robert.neumann@rhein-neckar.netsurf.de

Mikhl Herzog, Editor-in-Chief
Language and Culture Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry,
Columbia University


The following report was recently delivered in Chicago, to the annual 
Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, by Robert Neumann, a 
member of the Editorial Collegium of the _Language and Culture Atlas of 
Ashkenazic Jewry_ (LCAAJ), and chief of it data-processing operations.

Abstract

Beginning in 1959, a group of field workers interviewed emigrant informants
in the USA and Israel, many of them survivors of the Holocaust, and all of
them native to one of 603 selected cities and towns in Central and Eastern
Europe. Some 6000 hours of tape recordings testify to the variety of
language, folklore, life style, and cultural practices that characterized
the Jewish communities prior to World War II. The resulting archive provides
the basis for Yiddish and interlingual study and is a resource for
anthropological, cultural and historical research. The inherent biographical
information is a significant record of Holocaust history. 

Under the acronym EYDES a group of researchers has begun to digitize the
archive and build an indexed database. EYDES preserves this archive and
makes it accessible electronically for query and analysis. EYDES involves a
range of challenging research issues particular to spoken language data. In
addition, a four tiered representation will be required: a Yiddish
transcription, and translations into English, French and Russian. EYDES
handles multilingual representations, access methods, methods of
transliteration, multi alphabetic management, and meets cataloguing/indexing
challenges. It is realized by the collaboration of various cultural and
academic institutions, drawing on the expertise of their specialists. 


Framework and Issues

1. The Blind Spot in the European Eye

Yiddish language and literature flourished in Europe during in the first
half of this century and had a remarkable impact on the surrounding cultures
despite intense pressure resulting from economic hardship and the
nationalization of coterritorial cultures. An education system existed which
supported kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, along with their
respective umbrella organizations, vocational schools, teachers' seminars,
theologi-cal and academic institutions.  In the midst of the European
modernist national literatures, Yiddish literature came to fruition in this
century and enjoyed an international reputation.  Yiddish theater developed
with great impetus and created a linguistic standard of its own, a
particular stage pronunciation.  A network of social institutions sustained
daily life with children's homes, old age homes, soup kitchens and other
support for the poor, health organizations, and workers' unions.  Reserved
representation in parliaments and city councils , social clubs, sportclubs ,
cultural organizations and political parties were the pillars of
Jewish-Yiddish identity.  Throughout the centuries, Yiddish speakers were
aware of the closeness of their language to its sister language German.  As
a result, German cultural life drew Yiddish writers and Jewish artists and
intellectuals like a magnet up until 1933.  These developments all came to
an abrupt halt with the rise of German fascism. Jewish life and all its
culture were destroyed in the Holocaust. European Yiddish with its cultural
and religious variety, was all but obliterated on its home territory. In
places of refuge untouched by German soldiers the Stalinist persecutions
liquidated the last pockets of Jewish culture and made it impossible after
1945 to reconstitute Jewish life in the Soviet controlled imperium.  The
socio-psychological outcome of National Socialism in Germany, combined with
pre-war anti-Semitism in Europe, together with decades of European life
split by the Iron Curtain have erased the knowledge of Yiddish culture from
the European mind. Since the end of World War II and the fall of the Stalin
regime, centers of Yiddish language and literature have grown in communities
overseas, detached from their lands of origin and from the languages with
which they shared many centuries of coterritorial development, in the first
instance, German and the Slavic languages. It is a paradox that in the very
European areas with which they long shared both productive and tragic
developments, Yiddish language and culture have been largely relegated to
the realm of folkloristic exotica, with a touch of nostalgia and
anachronism. This dilemma was addressed by UNESCO, in the resolution of its
24th session, which seeks to counteract those developments and to "muster
extra-budgetary resources for activities to preserve and promote the Yiddish
language and culture ..."  In March of 1996 the European Council, too,
called upon the European states to protect Yiddish language and culture and
to foster activities which serve its cultivation. 

2. The Language and Culture Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry.=20

In the 1950s, the renowned American linguist Uriel Weinreich at Columbia
University, New York, began to realize the long harboured dream of creating
a Yiddish language and culture atlas.  "... what is familiar in one year may
be thrust to the brink of oblivion in the next ... What was too obvious for
study only yesterday has suddenly become precious ....what we do not collect
in the coming decade or so will be lost forever."  He undertook the unique
task of reconstructing the historical Yiddish language and culture area
after it had been dislocated and its home territory had been destroyed. Such
a large-scale effort at conducting language and culture geography "at a
distance" had never before been attempted. 

Beginning in 1959, a group of skilled field workers in the USA and Israel
interviewed emigrant informants, many of them survivors of the Holocaust,
and all of them native to one of 603 cities and towns in Central and Eastern
Europe. Between 1959 and 1972 the fieldworkers conducted interviews in
sessions lasting over several days, thereby creating an irreplaceable
tape-recorded archive of the living language in all its geographic
diversity. Some 6000 hours of tape recordings, accompanied by approximately
100,000 pages of field notes testify to the variety of language, folklore,
life style, and cultural practice that characterized the Jewish communities
of Central and Eastern Europe prior to World War II. In view of the fact
that many of the people interviewed were survivors of the Holocaust, the
biographical information which they provided must be considered a
significant record of relevance to Holocaust history, as well. 

At the heart of the inquiry, and thus of each interview, was a questionnaire
carefully designed by Uriel Weinreich on structural principles to cover the
main topics of the linguistic and ethnological variety in the former Yiddish
language territory. The questionnaire guaranteed the comparability of the
informants' answers and made it possible to elicit information on a large
number of central linguistic and cultural phenomena. The resulting archive
of nearly 6000 hours of taped conversation preserves the most authoritative
testimony to Yiddish language and culture in Europe in the 20th century.  It
provides the basis for reconstructing the genetic links between Yiddish and
German in chronological terms, i.e. to the earliest Jewish settlements in
the Rhine and Danube valleys.  In addition to its obvious relevance for
scholars of linguistics - particularly Yiddishists, Germanists, and
Slavicists - the archive also provides a unique resource for anthropological
and historical research as well. 

The LCAAJ archive thus serves a two-fold purpose: it constitutes a first
rank monument to European heritage and an irreplaceable resource for the
study of a life and culture that was destroyed by the Holocaust during World
War II. This was emphasized at an international meeting of experts of the
Israel National Commission for UNESCO which recommended the LCAAJ as a
primary object of research. The experts consider the preservation,
exploration and development of this archive as a key to the "sustenance and
reclamation of the cultural values created by the Jewish communities of
Eastern and Central Europe in the centuries before their destruction". 
Since the spring of 1995 the archive is owned by the libraries of Columbia
University, New York.  Columbia University is committed to the preservation
of the 6000 hours of interviews which are stored on about 2600 reels of
tape. 

Our Answer

We have decided to undertake the following: to transfer the Yiddish language
and culture archive onto the computer, to integrate it into a communication
network, and to make it accessible computatively. The post-Gutenberg
attributes and advantages of the new communication media and their
structures will be used systematically in order to reflect the manifold
linguistic and cultural dimensions inherent in the holdings of the LCAAJ
archive. The hitherto unparalleled degree of information presence via those
new communication structures will be used systematically towards presenting
the wealth of information from the LCAAJ archives in the EU states, in
Central and Eastern Europe, at universities and in museums, in radio
stations and newspaper offices, in publishing houses and media industries.
We plan to make this documentation fully accessible to cultural
institutions. Although we require the skills of linguists and computer
specialists in order to access and process the archival materials, the
transcribed project could not be successfully executed without the
collaboration of museums, memorial institutions and libraries. 

As a result, the LCAAJ archive is being brought to Europe and the
collections are being processed and disseminated. In a first step, in
cooperation with its partners, the _Foerderverein fuer jiddische Sprache und
Kultur_ (FJSK), will create and test a prototype of the designed electronic
archive.  In a second step, the materials from the LCAAJ archive will be
inputted into that prototype. They will be inputted in two ways: as
digitized speech and as transcribed speech, i.e. as written transcripts. In
this way, the archive materials will be electronically represented.  In a
third step, the archive materials will be electronically documented and
'catalogued' by building various indexes. In a fourth step, the arising
Yiddish culture database will be entered into electronic networks and by
that be made accessible to the general public.  At the same time, special
applications in different cultural areas (linguistics, music/entertainment,
political education) will demonstrate the archive's relevance, importance
and diversity.

The EYDES  Idea

The goals projected above require a long-range workplan which will encompass
about 4-5 years. The following description details the first component of
that long-range workplan. Where it is necessary, I will also outline the
framework within which that effort will take its place. 

1. The Significance of the Archive User

All activities associated with the first project period are accompanied by a
usergroup. Its role stresses the immense importance of users for our
project, users who will realize the dissemination of the archive materials
in the future and thereby serve as potential multiplicators of this
initiative. To constitute the usergroup, representatives have been invited
from various sectors: institutions devoted to secondary and tertiary
education, political education, culture and the arts; the entertainment
industry; institutions for the preservation of cultural heritage; academic
institutions. At every stage of the work, the representatives are expected
to provide the project with feed-back and advice. At the same time, the
usergroup also serves the important function of introducing potential users
to the computerized archive while it is being built. 

2. The Original taped Interviews as a Data Base

The interviews of the LCAAJ archive stored on digital audio tapes will be
inputted as digital speech signals into a data base. In the process, the
continuous interview from each location will be so segmented as to permit
the user direct access (i)to all the data relating to each of the 603
locations covered by the survey and (ii) to the responses from 603 different
locations to each of approximately 3200 questions in the questionnaire. The
segmentation of the data by location and by question number permits small
and well defined units to be extracted in response to a set of linguistic
and culture-historical questions which underlie the design of the
questionnaire and of the entire investigation. 

3. Transcription and Accessibility

At the above described first level of work, easy access will be provided to
the answers of each informant (of each location) to all questions indicated
in the questionnaire. However, all taped materials not directly relating to
the specifically elicited questionnaire topics will remain unidentified and
therefore inaccessible. Each interview also has taped records of many hours
of continuous conversation which touch upon topics of ethnographic and
historical relevance. These discussions constitute a unique resource for the
study of contemporary European history, cultural and settlement history,
connections between the Central and East European territories, the history
of emigration, and the growth and development of overseas 'colonies'
throughout the five continents, which maintained decades-long cultural and
economic relationships to their home territories until the latter were
destroyed in the Holocaust. These records consist of shorter or longer
narratives, sometimes of songs, proverbs, folk-remedies, folktales, etc. We
estimate that a third of the tape materials consist of such materials which,
in accordance with French tradition, we call "ethnotexts". 

These data are contained in largely unstructured and freely associative
speech passages which originated spontaneously during the course of an
interview. While they were invited and actively welcomed by the interviewers
and were tape-recorded in full, they were neither recorded on paper nor
indexed in any way. They are accessible only on the tapes in the original
sound, with no indication as to place or content. In order to provide access
to these invaluable and irreplaceable unstructured materials and to make
most efficient use of them, we have begun to transcribe all interviews,
creating written records of the audio recordings. The transcription of the
LCAAJ tapes follows the guidelines of Standard Yiddish spelling (the
transcription of the western language varieties will provide a functional
equivalent thereof). All spoken language that can be heard on the tapes will
be transcribed: the speech of each interviewer and the comments of
bystanders will be recorded in script along with the answers of each
informant. Each text will be attributed to its respective speaker and marked
as such. The transcribed interview records will be inputted into the
computer along with the original sound recordings. 

The transcripts in Standard Yiddish orthography will also be presented in a
transliteration based on the Roman alphabet, so that the accessibility of
the archive be maximized. The presentation which will follow the
internationally used YIVO Romanization of Yiddish texts.  It can be
generated automatically, on the basis of rules and exception files.

The emerging written texts will be linked and synchronized with the
previously structured question/ location segments of the original sound
signals. In this way a bi-medial full text data base originates, consisting
of spoken language and accompanying written records which are synchronized
and referred to one another through pointers. The symbolic part of text in
this full text data base can now be accessed as described below, using the
general techniques of indexing and retrieval.

The wordforms will be lemmatized and lexicalized, so that a new kind of
thesaurus will emerge therefrom. This new thesaurus is then not dependent of
the concepts used by specific academic disciplines; it is based, instead, on
common language designations and provides optimal access to any kind of
search process. When the outlined tasks have been carried out potential
clients will be able to research the archive to its full extent on the basis
of text tokens. They will not be restricted to specific, pre-structured
concepts and to the coordinates of a scheme which was pre-designed by
linguistic or ethnologic spealists. 

In addition, we intend to translate the lexicalized documentation into
English, French, Russian and German. Of course, we will also install the
already existing specified indexes, i.e. the Index to the Dialectology. 
Thus the archive can assume its innovative role and serve specific research
purposes as well as broad educational aims in the public sector specific
research purposes. 

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.051

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



