
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 07.161
March 5, 1998

1) More Yiddish linguistics and etymology (A Manaster Ramer)
2) kurve (Edward L. Keenan)
3) kurve (Lance W. Garmer)
4) Strange Kind of Woman (Shaya Mitelman)
5) kurve (Irv Young)
6) kurve (Henry Zalkin)
7) Ode to Joy (Maynard Wishner)
8) openers (Harvey Varga)
9) "fartaytsht un farbesert" (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 2 Mar 1998 15:46:03 -0500 (EST)
From: manaster@umich.edu
Subject: More Yiddish linguistics and etymology

A recent Jerusalem Post (2/21 I believe) features a column by Moshe Kohn about
the etymologies of the name Yente and the words shlimazl and shlemil.  In the
discussion he mentions correspondents who referred him to some Hebrew and
German etymological dictionaries which are supposed to derive shlemil from the
Hebrew she-lo mo'il, and he also a mentions a "Yiddishist" from Petah Tikva
who told him that shlimazl comes from the Polish adjective szlamazarny
'careless, negligent'.  These proposals, which Mr. Kohn, to his credit, does
NOT endorse seem to me to be instructive examples of how NOT to do etymology
and their particular failings may be useful to analyze here, because they are
quite common in this kind of work. 

The first principle of a putative etymology must be that it not be based
merely on similarities of sounds between the attested word and its proposed
source, but rather that the sounds correspond according to the formulae that
have been worked out, based on ALL words in the language, for how its sound
have evolved.  The formulae for the correspondences between Yiddish and
(ancient or medieval Hebrew were largely worked out by Birnbaum in the 1920's,
with some refinements added by Bin-Nun, Beranek, Weinreich, and perhaps
others, and are not (aside from a few small points)  controversial (so have
the correspondences between Yiddish and medieval German long been known; here
the fundamental work was that of Gerzon, Sapir, Bin-Nun, Weinreich, et al.).
According to what I understand of these formulae, we would expect shelo mo'il
to give something like *shloyml or *shlemoyl (the asterisk is used to indicate
a form that does not exist).  Since that is NOT what we find in Yiddish, the
etymology in question cannot be accepted.  Of course, as in any science, we
could always find that our formulae are inadequate and have to revise our
ideas, so I will not say that this proposed etymology is impossible.  Rather,
it seems to be inconsistent with our whole understanding of the way Hebrew
words come out in Yiddish garb, and unless that whole understanding is shown
to be inadequate, we cannot accept the proposal.  The operative concept here
is that there is no such thing in modern linguistics or philology as an
isolated etymology of a single word.  Every etymology is a part of a complex
theory we have regardingthe whole evolution of the language, and it can only
be evaluated as part and parcel of that theory. 

The idea that shlimazl comes from Polish szlamazarny is also difficult to
accept, and this time for even more fundamental reasons.  Again, the theory we
have of the historical development of any one language (e.g., Yiddish or
Polish) does not stand alone; it is part of our theory of how languages evolve
in general (for experience has shown that Hopi, Polish, Chinese, Yiddish, and
every other language studied in detail to date evolve in the SAME general
ways).  Based on our understanding of how languages change, it would be
unusual for the noun (shlimazl) to occur in the recipient language and for the
adjective (szlamazarny) to occur in the donor lg.  What I mean is that
szlamazarny consists of a root szlamaz- and a sequence of suffixes -ar-n-y,
and it would be strange if Yiddish were to extract that root and make it into
a noun.  But it would be perfectly commonplace for Polish to borrow a Yiddish
noun and stick its suffixes on to that.  In addition, if the Polish form were
the source, it should have an etymology in Polish, but I am not aware of a
good etymology for it.  Finally, there is a little detail.  In Polish the word
in question is pronounced by some (e.g., by me-- I happen to be a native
speaker of Polish) not with the sound written sz but with the one written s'
(s-acute).  Now, Polish has two different shibilants neither of which is the
same as a Yiddish or English sh.  In fact, a Yiddish or English sh sounds to a
Polish ear as something in between our sz and s' (and I think the precise
acoustic and physio- logical descriptions of these sounds would bear our that
there is an objective basis for this feeling), so that it makes sense for
Yiddish word with sh to beborrowed into Polish with both sz and s'.  In
addition, it is a frequently observed fact that in many languages words of
foreign origin exhibit variations in sound which native words do not (I do not
know who first discovered this, I think I learned of this from the writings of
the Czech linguist Mathesius), so the mere fact of such variation in the
Polish word would immediately suggest that it might be of foreign origin.  In
sum, given the lack of a Polish etymology (unless the Polish linguists know
something;  I am not able to check any Polish etymological works at present),
the variation between the sz and the s', AND the fact that Polish has this
word only inthe form of an adjective with a bunch of suffixes while Yiddish
has it in the basic noun form, all this would indicate that in all likelihood
the direction of the borrowing would be from Yiddish into Polish.  When we add
to this the fact that shlimazl is found in Yiddish dialects of Western Europe
(which as a rule have no borrowings from Polish whatsoever), the case becomes
pretty much closed. 

I would argue that it is the emphasis on every etymology being part of the
overall theory of the evolution of the language in question, which in turn has
to be part of our overall theory of the evolution of ALL languages, that
distinguishes the modern "scientific" approach to language (dating to the
early or mid-19th cent.)  as opposed to the older approach, which goes bacl at
least to Plato and which prevailed in European scholarship through the
beginning of the 19th cent.  and then very quickly receded into the background
BUT which continues to be the prevalent, maybe the SOLE, way of thinking about
language which is taught to the public at large.  This antiquated approach of
course is the one where every word and every language is treated individually,
atomistically, without any constraints or rules save those of the author's
individual imagination for what sounds alike or what meanings seem related to
what other meanings.  I do not know, nor have I ever seen any study on this,
why the breakthroughs of the early 19th century scholars of language have
never become part of elementary curriculums in the Western world and why
instead we still allow almost everybody to be taught the earlier, atomistic,
view of language.  But the evidence against the older and for the newer
approach is overwhelming, and in academic circles there has not been any
dispute over it for over 100 years, except that during Stalin's reign, for a
time, modern linguistics was banned in Russia and a philologist named Marr was
allowed to create a "New Science of Language", which actually in all but name
represented a particularly crazy form of something much like what Plato may
have believed. 

Yididsh is actually a wonderful example of how the one approach fails and how
the other works, and it is to be hoped that more lovers of Yiddish will treat
its history as more than a collection of anecdotes, and recognize the
achievements of the relatively few scholars who laid the foundation for our
understanding (still very partial, I might add, and in need of more work) of
where Yiddish comes and how it got here from there. 

A Manaster Ramer

PS. I keep citing Plato (spec. his Cratylus), but I believe that some
specialists suspect he was not really endorsing the incorrect etymologies
given there but rather trying to make fun of them.  If so, he would have been
a millennium and a half ahead of his time, for the fact is that the atomistic
approach to etymology and to language generally prevailed into the early 19th
cent. 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 14:39:26 -0500 (EST)
From: keenan@fas.harvard.edu
Subject: kurve

Presence in all Slavic languages, and plausible etymology within Slavic, lead
one to think that some one or combination of them must be the source of both
Yiddish and Hungarian words. 

Etymologies: Vasmer favors *kur ("chicken, rooster") > kury >kur"ve; 
Preobrazhenskii *hure (whore)."  V. seems to have the better case. 

Edward L. Keenan
Cambridge, MA 

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 15:24:35 EST
From: LWG34 <LWG34@aol.com>
Subject: "Kurve"

If "kurve" is from Hungarian, then that is quite a coincidence, as the word in
Polish is an established (and extremely offensive) one.  In Polish, it is
spelled "kurwa," and does indeed mean "whore" or "slut," although the word
"dziwka" (also very strong) is much more common used when referring to such
women.  "Kurwa," on the other hand, has become a general, all-purpose shock
word in Polish, being more or less equivalent to the "f word" in English. 

Lance W. Garmer

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 19:58:29 -0500
From: Serge Mitelman <simitelman@pol.net>
Subject: "Strange Kind of Woman".

It's not true that kurve cannot be found in dictionaries. Here are but two
examples off-hands: 1) Complete Yiddish-Hebrew Dictionary, AKA - Fuler
Yidish-Hebreisher Verterbukh fun M.Tsanin, H.Leyvik-farlag, 1982, reads: 
"kurve (s) - zona, yatsamit; kurvish - shel zona, shel yatsamit";  2) 
Thesaurus of the Yiddish Language, or Der Oytser fun der Yidisher Shprakh fun
N.Stuchkoff, YIVO, 1950, p.692 (among other entries): "kurve, kurvenik,
kurevnik, and a kurve iz a ganef". It is slowly percolating onto the literary
pages as well, see for example Kobi Veytsner's "Dire Gelt" (Di Pen, N.21,
April 1996), - not without criticism, though (see Lilke Meizner, Di Pen, N.27,
Oktober 1996). This word might have some Yiddish connotations in the Romanian
language, but not so in its Moldavian dialect, - where " kurva" is the only
slang word to reflect the meaning. In Russian is it used figuratively even
more than literally (e.g.: "skurvit'sya"(a verb)  - to become corrupt). 

I find another word to refer to this strange kind of woman even more
intriguing, namely: khune, khune-beyle, and the local expression - khune-beyle
de la yash (i.e. "fin Yos" in Moldavian). It has been even more commonplace on
the Bessarabian streets and in our scattered "diaspora" now, and can also be
found in Stuchkoff's. The fact that it is onomastic leads me to believe that
it might stem from some sort of folklore. To illustrate this I will render the
following punning anecdote (only between us, di mendelyaner, of course,
because the topic is taboo!):

Se geyen tsvey shvester, yn bageygenen a ingermon. Freygt er di eyne:

-Ir zent, dakht tsekh, Khunes tokhter?

Entfert di tsveyte:

-Take yo. Mir zenen beyde khunes!

Can anybody clarify the issue as to where this latter word comes from?

Shaya Mitelman.

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 23:40:37 EST
From: YOU 2 IG <YOU2IG@aol.com>
Subject: "kurve"

I can't contribute anything sensible to the quest for the derivation of the
word "kurve". However it does provoke nostalgia in recollection of the mirth
generated on some seemingly interminable car trips when the double entendre of
road signs such as SLOW CURVE & DANGEROUS CURVE was seized upon for humorous
(?)  exploitation. Just another example of the saturation of our lives by
Yiddish tam albeit sometimes on the bawdy side.  Hoping this is not too devoid
of tam -- geyt gesuntehaid. 

Irv Young
Isles of  Capri, FL

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 04 Mar 1998 18:08:02 +0000
From: Henry Zalkin <Zalkin@geocities.com>
Subject: Kurve

The word is the same not only in Hungarian, but also in all Slavic languages
(well, it is very rare in Russian) as well as some Finnish dialects. Leo
Rosten's _The Joys of Yiddish_ suggests it might be of Hebrew origin, but I
dare to doubt this. After all, the English word _whore_ is of the very same
root. 

Henry Zalkin

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 20:43:34 -0500 
From: mwishner@jon.cjfny.org
Subject: Ode to Joy

There (is) another verse to the Ode to Joy recalled by Deenah Mersky [07.159]

            Oikh ain gott hot zai bashafen.
            Un ain Fotterland di velt.
            Aleh mentshen zainen brider
            Dos iz shoin fest aingeshtelt

Maynard Wishner

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 4 Mar 1998 02:49:26 EST
From: Varga96 <Varga96@aol.com>
Subject: openers

I remember growing up in Brooklyn in the 50's that when my father used to bump
into some one he knew, when asked "vus hert zich", his response was a playful
"me gult zich un me shert zich" or maybe "fun oyvn mult zich, fu hintn shit
zich".  I remember that there were more of these responses that he and many of
his friends used.  They tended to establish the level of humor or seriousness
the coming interaction would have.  Do any of you out there use these, or
remember what they are?  Please post. 

I also have noticed that only men tend to answer this way; that possibly some
of these were too coarse to be used by women.  Efsher s'zennen etleche vos
vern genitzt nor by froyen. Not being of that ilk I don't have first hand
knowledge.  My father was a very playful and gregarious man and it might be
that this is something more in keeping with a character type than any other
factor. 

Comments anyone?

Harvey Varga

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 04 Mar 1998 11:45:48 +0200
From: Leonard Prager <lprager@research.haifa.ac.il>
Subject: "fartaytsht un farbesert"

A few days ago I received the following email letter from an old friend, Benny
Dorfman (whom some of you may know from his and his wife, Rivka's, writings on
East European synagogues) and I want to share my reply with Mendelyaner.  I
also want the help of Mendelyaner in putting this hoary matter to rest.  It
should not prove as testy as, say, the etymology of _tsholnt_. 

Hi, L.:

I know the expression "fartaytsht un farbesert" is occasionally used on the
flyleaf of books translated into Yiddish, but I wonder if you could tell me
how the phrase got to be there.  Is it likely that translators frequently made
real contributions to the content of the books they translated? 

Regards, Ben-Zion
--------------
Dear Benny:

I am assuming you are not being facetious.  I will be sober, hopefully not
forbiddingly so.  The phrase "fartaytsht un farbesert" is supposed to have
appeared on the title page of a translation of one or more of Shakespeare's
plays into Yiddish or on billboards advertizing the production of Shakespeare
plays in Yiddish.  The story is repeated as a joke at the expense of the
Yiddish publisher or producer who out of sheer ignorance and perhaps a modicum
of bravado could claim to have "improved" Shakespeare.  But the entire tale
may be apocryphal or if true may have another meaning.  I have to confess that
I don't recall actually having seen a translation with that title page phrase. 
Have you?  Has anyone? 

Perhaps as a recoil from the hoary joke you have asked me to comment on, I
repressed the memory of having seen it -- years ago I looked at most of the
published editions of Shakespeare in Yiddish.  A publisher could have quite
mechanically put the phrase on translated works or it could simply mean that
an earlier translation has been "farbesert" in the sense of 'corrected'.  It
is not absolutely clear that what is meant is that the Shakespearean work has
been improved; the intent could simply be that the text of that work has been
corrected (of printing errors, etc.).  Or, if the phrase appeared as part of
the promotion of a stage version, the implication is that the stage version
has been improved -- a legitimate claim for a producer to make, since all
actual productions of Shakespeare make alterations in the received or disputed
text.  Even in Shakespeare's time, "bad" quartos of plays were sometimes
followed by "good" ones.  But if that is all that is meant by "farbesert," it
would of course not be funny and it would not able one to laugh at the Yiddish
primitives who perpetrated the expression. 

It is true that the earliest translations and theatrical scripts of
Shakespeare's works in Yiddish were horrendous, the products of untrained
individuals working under impossible conditions and serving a largely
uneducated audience.  On one occasion following the playing of _Hamlet_ the
audience is reported to have applauded vigorously and to have called for the
author.  This story is almost certainly true and I have always taken it to be
a tribute to the audience rather than a joke at their expense.  And while
there may be some truth to the "fartaytsht un farbesert" story I always winced
when I heard it.  The anecdote has frequently masked a stereotypic view of
Yiddish culture and a condescending attitude towards an unschooled immigrant
generation. 

I think it would be a good idea if I put your question and my answer into
_Mendele_ just to see what other readers and some librarians with immediate
access to Yiddish translations of Shakespeare think of this matter.  Where in
print does the phrase "fartaytsht un farbesert" exist on title pages/theater
posters?  It should be possible to establish the facts.  _Mendele_ exists to
settle such questions.  It is the "shayles tshuves" of matters Yiddish on the
internet. 

Yours,
L.

Benny has since assured me that he was not being in the least facetious and
looks forward to the discussion in _Mendele_.  He also adds:  "It's
interesting that you ascribe the _fartaytsht_ exclusively to translations of
Shakespeare.  I would have thought it could apply to almost any work.  In any
event, one might have expected that in the interest of clarity and avoidance
of ambiguity, that the flyleaf could have announced:  _A farbeserte
fartaytshung_." 

Leonard Prager
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 07.161

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



