
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.020
July 18, 1999

1) "Handel, handel" (Feygl Infeld Glezer)
2) Sholem Aleichem and Charlie Chaplin (Ester Vaisman)
3) Itzhak Katzanelson: "das lid wagen Szlomo Zalichowski" (Ada Holtzman)
4) The stress pattern of Ashkenazi Hebrew (Rick Turkel)
5) nito keyn foylyakes (Lucas Bruyn)
6) the dying language that refuses to die (Feygl Infeld Glezer)
7) Di Gojim and Gojim (Fred Sherman)
8) Di Gojim and Gojim (Reinhard "Ron" Hahn)
9) French expressions in Yiddish (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 05:41:28 -0400 (EDT)
From: Feigl I Glaser <yiddish1@juno.com>
Subject: "HANDEL, HANDEL"

Dovid Krycer iz gerekht [09.017].  Dos lid vos iz gehert gevorn fun an
aynvoyner in a moyshev-zikeynim in Melburn iz a barimte shafung fun eynem
fun undzere barimte mikhabrim.  Ikh ken zikh in itstikn moment nit dermonen
ver es hot di poeme ongeshribn, ober mir hobn zi gelernt in di TSISHO-shuln
in Poyln un ikh meyn az ikh gedenk khotsh a teyl fun fun di verter.  Ikh
meyn az der nomen fun der poeme iz "der hendler" oder "handel".

Oysgeton fun zikh di shand,
mit a zekl [efsher "shtekl"] in der hant  
geyt er um fun hoyf tsu hoyf,
heybt di oygn hoykh aroyf
un vi umetik es klingt
ibern gantsn hoyf es klingt
        "handel, handel".

Ekh vos zogt ir liber yid?
Vos dertseylt mir ayer lid?
- Kh'voyn dort oyf der Smotshe gas,
In a keler faykht un nas;
Zumer kumt dort nit arayn
Fun der liber zun keyn shayn,
Vinter shmayst der vint.

Et vos hob ikh zikh farredt?
Efsher hot ir an alt bet,
Alte hoyzn, alte shikh,
Vos ir vilt nor handl ikh...
....
        Handel, handel.

Ikh bin zikher az imetser vet aykh zogn vu ir kent di poeme gefinen un az ir
vet krign di resht fun di verter.  Oyb ikh vel zikh dermonen dem sof, oder
gefinen di poeme tsvishn mayhne bikher , vel ikh aykh dos mit fargenign
tsushikn. Der hoyf- hendler mit der torbe un a shtekn in der hant iz geven a
geveyntlekhe dershaynung in Poyln. Do redt zikh vegn a hoyf-hendler in
Varshe (vu s'iz geven di barimte Smocza gas (Dragon Street).  Mitn shtekn
oder shtekl flegt er klapn oyfn hoyf (bay undz in dem ayzernem tirl fun
untererdishn shtibl vu der "struzh" {hoyz-vekhter} hot gedreyt a pompe kedey
tsu zamlen oyf di dekher regn-vaser), un azoy arum un mit di verter "handel,
handel" vos er hot oysgeshrien, flegt er tsien di oyfmerkzamkeyt fun di
aynvvoyner (spetsyel fun di kundeysim kinder). 

Di vayterdike verter "Handel,handel `kh`koyf alte zakhn; Handel, handel
kh'hob nisht shabes tsu makhn..." hob ikh gehert di hendler oyszingen, ober
ikh gloyb nit az dos zaynen a teyl verter fun der barimter poeme. 

Mit beste grusn,
Ayer,
Feygl Infeld Glezer

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 16:01:50 -0400 (EDT)
From: Ester Vaisman <asya_v@europe.com>
Subject: Sholem Aleichem and Charlie Chaplin

In Mendele, volume 09.013, Larry Rosenwald asked what Sholom Aleichem
thought about Charlie Chaplin. Sholom Aleichem himself provides the answer: 

  "Chaplin has the ablility to fill many hearts with joy, particularly
  children's hearts; without children's laughter the world couldn't exist.
  Charlie's image fascinated me. Everything about him is grandiose: the
  small moustache, the excessively large, worn out shoes, the wide, ragged
  trousers, the tight frock-coat, the tattered derby, the crooked cane, the
  bizarre walk. This image in itself is a genuine work of art. No one has
  ever created anything of the like, neither with pen, nor with brush." 

This quote comes from the journal "Tsaytshrift" (Paris, 1956, n.14, p.
147-150). I found it in a collection of essays entitled "Sholom Aleikhem:
Pisatel' i Chelovek" ("Sholom Aleichem: the Writer and the Man", Moscow,
1994), compiled and edited by M. S. Belen'kii. The same book contains an
essay by Peretz Markish, written in 1939, but apparently not published until
1959. It was translated into Russian by B. Kotik and E. Lazebnikova, and
originally printed in a literary journal "Druzhba Narodov" (Moscow, 1959,
n.3). In the following excerpt from his essay, Markish addresses some
similarities between Sholom Aleichem and Chaplin: 

  "In the character of his comic elements, Sholom Aleichem is close to
  Charlie Chaplin. In essence, Sholom Aleichem's little man, just like
  Charlie, takes the road of his misfortunes. Sholom Aleichem's characters
  are so surprisingly serious, so immersed in their own naive calculations,
  so deeply, almost statesmanly worried: Bismarck didn't, G-d forbid, catch
  a cold, did he? For if Bismarck has caught a cold, the stock market will
  fall, and then, before you know it, the smell of war is in the air.... And
  all this -- the seriousness and the naivete, the high politics and the
  people's diplomacy, from people who already who knows how long haven't had
  a crumb in their mouths, and who can't wait until a three-rouble note from
  home arrives here, to the exchange...."

Both of the above quotes were also included in Belen'kii's book, "Biographia
Smekha" ("A Biography of Laughter", Moscow, 1991). Belen'kii writes: 

  "A surprising coincidence: the beginning of Chaplin's artistic career
  coincided with the date of Sholom Aleichem's second visit to New York,
  1914. The writer highly valued the cinema, which was able not only to
  amuse, but also to convey important information to broad sections of the
  population. He frequently visited small movie theaters in Harlem and those
  near his home. One can say without doubt that Sholom Aleichem hadn't
  missed a single one of Chaplin's films." 

Footnotes: Moisei Solomonovich Belen'kii was a writer, translator,
philosopher, director of a Yiddish theatrical college at GOSET
(Gosudarstvennyi Evreiskii Teatr), and chief editor of the publishing house
"Der Emes". He had been arrested in 1949, was imprisoned for more than a
year, and afterwards spent four more years in a camp near Karaganda. He has
written over a dozen books and many articles. Belen'kii was one of the
leading scholars of Sholom Aleichem in the Soviet Union. He compiled,
edited, and wrote comments for three six-volume collections of Sholom
Aleichem's works, translated into Russian (1959-1961, 1971-1974, 1988-1990).
He died two years ago in Israel.  

The quotes in this posting were translated from Russian; I haven't seen the
Yiddish originals. 

Ester Vaisman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 10:46:40 -0400 (EDT)
From: ada01@netvision.net.il
Subject: Itzhak Katzanelson: "das lid wagen Szlomo Zalichowski"

Shalom,

this poem, written by Itzhak Katzanelson, the Holocaust poet, in Ghetto
Warsaw, July 1942, following the public execution of 10 Jews in Zdunska
Wola.  Szlomo Zalichowski, son of Reb Gedalia was from Pabianice and only
moved to Zdunska Wola during the war. 

I would like to know if anyone knows if this poem was translated to English,
when, by whom and where?  I wish to include in my new memorial web page
dedicated to Zdunska Wola,
http://www.geocities.com/Paris/Rue/4017/zdunska/zdunska.htm

Many thanks,

Ada Holtzman
ISRAEL

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 15:38:24 -0400 (EDT)
From: rturkel@cas.org
Subject: The stress pattern of Ashkenazi Hebrew

Rubke Fischmann asked in Mendele 09.015:

  Although this list is devoted to Yiddish, I would like to enquire about
  the nature of word-stress in the traditional Ashkenazi pronunciation of
  the loshn-koydesh. I understand that the majority of words are stressed
  penultimately, unless the last-but-one syllable contains a khotef vowel
  - in that case the stress shifts on the third syllable from the end. Is
  that correct?

For the most part, yes.  Of course, if there _is_ no prepenultimate
syllable, the stress does fall on the syllable with the chotef vowel, as in
the word 'emes. 

  1. If it is so, then: what of the prefixes like l@-/li- (@ being schwa),
  b@-/bi-, or, for that matter, the definite article ha-/ho-/hey? Can they
  ever bear stress?

Not that I know of, except possibly for emphasis.  This is another exception
to the general rule, like the chotef vowel mentioned above. 

  (e.g. in the brokhe:   ['boyrey 'pri 'ho?eyts] OR [ho'?eyts] ?)

Definitely the latter.  The former sounds terrible to me.

  2. Do the same rules of prosody apply to the Aramaic of the gemore or
  some of the tfiles?

I'm not 100% sure that they do, but I can't think of any exceptions al regel
achas. 

Hope this helps.  A gutn.

Rick Turkel

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 15 Jul 1999 11:17:08 -0400 (EDT)
From: Marion Troia <troia@wxs.nl>
Subject: nito keyn foylyakes

I ask Ms Khane Kleine to forgive me for responding to her refutation of my
criticism of Yiddish in admirable Yiddish in English.  I belong to the
growing group of people, who thoroughly enjoy Yiddish, but cannot call it
'mameloshn'. Living in a region where Yiddish is not spoken and not being
wealthy enough to follow 'summer courses' abroad I depend on 'books'. 

To answer her point by point:

1. It is very good news that an index of all words contained in the
'Thesaurus of the Yiddish Language' is forthcoming. Nahum Stutchkoff's work
appeared almost 50 years ago and its one obvious defect, the absence of such
an index, must have been clear to all who used this treasure since. The
compilation of such a list does not call for an expert linguist - its just a
lot of work. That it had to take 50 years to do it seems a bit excessive.
The availability of a comprehensive word list of a language is the
prerequisite for the putting together of dictionaries. Let us hope Simon
Neuberg will make his list available to all, preferably on the Net. 

2. First I would like to point out that I was speaking about the (22nd) 
edition of Alexander Harkavy's English-Yiddish & Yiddish English Dictionary,
which does not contain Hebrew. Secondly, that the (first edition of the)
dictionary of 'fun loshn-koydesh shtamike verter' by Niborski and Neuberg
does on the one hand not contain very many words not to be found in
Weinreich's English-Yiddish & Yiddish-English dictionary and on the other is
still far from complete. The words not contained in Weinreich could easily
be translated into English. 

I agree that these three dictionaries were written with a different concept.
Harkavi wrote in the first place for speakers of Yiddish, who having
immigrated to the States needed to learn English. Weinreich wanted to purify
the Yiddish language of Germanisms etc. and to set a new standard: Modern
Yiddish. Niborski gives a list of Jiddish words of Hebrew-Aramaic origin
with their translations in Yiddish and literary quotations illustrating
their usage. The concept of Weinreich's dictionary, though reasonable 30
years ago, is outdated. We don't need a prescriptive dictionary, but a
dictionary of both spoken and literary Yiddish. Since the access to Yiddish
for many new learners of the language is through literature, all words to be
found in say Sholem Aleykhem's work ought to be in, whether puristically
correct or not.  Also all words to be heard in the modern spoken language,
whether in the States, Canada, the former Soviet Union, Israel,
South-America, Europe or Australia, should be in. This is not the case.  My
proposal to fuse at least the three dictionaries mentioned would be only one
step towards the goal. With modern computer technology an easy step. The
argument that this would be impossible because one cannot mix apples with
pears does not hold. Basically all three dictionaries contain but one
ingredient, Yiddish. Any new dictionary is a fusion of the lexicographic
work previously done, with new additions. It would seem to me that the main
reason why it has not been done yet is because the publishers of these works
pay rather homage to the God of copyright than work for the benefit of the
Yiddish language. 

3. I have nothing against 'College Yiddish' per se". It is only thoroughly
outdated. Obviously it escapes Ms Kleine, that during the last 50 years the
approaches to language teaching have radically changed. I would be happy to
explain, but would have to write a separate piece on the subject. The Gaon
of Vilna is well known for the great interest he took in physics. He missed
Newton, because he only read on the subject in Hebrew. You missed the
'communicative' approach in language teaching and so did all writers of
recent Yiddish textbooks. I dare say: there is not one decent book for
learning Yiddish on the market - if we may compare them to the courses
available for learning most modern languages. 

4. I have never been to any seminar for teachers of Yiddish. However,
judging by the courses available, they must be substandard. From my
correspondence with several prominent teachers of Yiddish it became clear to
me that they generally don't have any idea about modern methodology or
socio-linguistics and what is more - they show very little interest. Some
time ago I summoned the Mendelianer to work together on making an inventory
of all existing teaching materials available. Only one reaction. A critical
review of one of the most recently published course books was rejected by
"The Mendele Review", because the writer might be offended. 

I maintain: Yiddish is very much alive, but a bit lazy.

Lucas Bruyn.

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 19:03:30 -0400 (EDT)
From: Feigl I Glaser <yiddish1@juno.com>
Subject: the dying language that refuses to die

di shtarbndike shprakh vos zogt zikh op fun shtarbn

Shoyn iber 100 yor vi gevise"perzenlekhkeytn" redn vegn Yidish vi a
shtarbndike shprakh. Ikh (un avade oykh a sakh fun aykh) hob gehert
farsheydene shtus vegn Yidish: 

 1. "Yidish iz nit keyn shprakh, nor a gemish fun farsheydene shprakhn." 
Mayn gelungnster entfer oyf dem iz geven gevondn tsu an English-geboyrenem
kuzin, vos hot geredt mit a "cockney accent" un mit bitul tsu Yidish, az
"nit ale zaynen gebentsht mit a kuzine, vos redt in tsvey azelkhe gemishte
nit-shprakhike shprakhn - Yiddish un English". Vi ken men gor farglaykhn di
tsvey shprakhn, hot er zikh gevundert un er iz gevorn oyser zikh
baleydikndik. 

 2. Ikh hob gehert vegn eynem, "a groysn shprakhn-kener" vos hot zikh
oysgedrikt far talmidim fun Yiddish in Columbia Universitet, az der
untersheyd tsvishn a shprakh un a dyalekt iz: "a shprakh hot a land un a
dialekt hot nit."  Nu, vos ken men nebekh fun im farlangen, az dos gantse
lebn hot men im in Isroel geshtupt azoyne trotshines in kop arayn, un
farshteyt zikh az dos iz a groyser , groyser "nonsense". 

Un vifl mentshn fun mizrekh-ayrope, afile azelkhe vos barimen zikh az zey
shtamen fun rabonishn ikhes, dertseyln dem umzin, "az dortn hobn zey nit
gekent keyn Yiddish; nor ersht do, in di Fareynikte Shtatn hobn zey zikh
oysgelernt di shprakh?"  Aza eyne, a gor noente kroyve mayne, hob ikh amol
gefregt tsi "zi hot keyn mol nit geredt tsu ir tatn un mamen, vayl yene hobn
dokh biklal nit gekent keyn andere shprakh vi Yidish. Dos aynredn dort di
yidish-redndike yidn az me darf nor redn hebreish un di shprakh funem land
vu zey voynen, iz geven di arbet fun der Haskole bavegung un fun di
Hebreistn vos hobn gevolt dos loshn mit koyekh aroysraysn fun zikorn fun di
Yidish-redndike. 

Azoy vi ir ale, bin ikh zeyer tsufridn az in gevise gimnazyes, in ale
gehoybene universitetn un in a sakh vinkelekh iber der velt lernen zikh
yugntlekhe Yidish. Ikh bin tsufridn az azoy fil eltere mentshn lekhtsn nokh
a Yidish vort un kumen zikh oyslebn in Yidish in farsheydene tsentern.  Ikh
bin tsufridn, az endlekh hot di kneset onerkent Yidish vi a shprakh vun Yidn
un az in gevise erter iber Medines Isroel vert gelernt a bisl Yidish. Dos iz
a groyser shrit foroys.  Ikh bin tsufridn vos es zaynen oyfgekumen azoy fil
klezmer-kapeles un khorn vos kumen zikh lernen Yidish kedey tsu farshteyn di
muzik un lirik vos zey shpiln un zingen.  Ikh bin tsufridn az Mame-Loshn un
andere Yidish-libhobers kumen zikh tsuzamen oyf a por teg kedey zikh tsu
lernen Yidish un tsu farbrengen in a Yidisher svive. Un dokh iz umetik oyfn
harts! 

Me ruft Yidish mame-loshn vayl dos iz geven dos ershte loshn vos Yidishe
kinder hobn ongehoybn hern un aynzapn in zikh fun zeyere mames, ven zey hobn
gezeygt milkh fun di mames brustn. Vifl azelkhe kinder hobn mir haynt, say
tsvishn di veltlekhe yidn, say tsvishn di religyeze?  Zeltn ven un vu me ken
hern afile tsvishn di kinder in Boro Park, Monsey un andere shtokhim bazetst
fun frume, a Yidish vort.  Zeltn voser Yishive lernt mit di kinder shraybn
un leyenen yidish, shoyn opgeredt fun Yidishe lider un Yidisher literatur. 
A sakh fun di yidishe togshuln in dorem amerike zaynen tsu bislekh
ibergegangen in di hent fun di hebreistn. Frier hot men dort gelernt
hebreish vi a tsveyte shprakh ober itst lernt men dort Yidish oyfn shpits
fun a tey-lefele. Di yidishe tsdoke federatsyes un andere organizatsyes
helfn veynik tsu organizirn yidishe shuln un yidishe klasn.  Ikh veys nit
fun vanen es kenen kumen groyse masn Yidish-redndike kayn Amerike un kayn
Isroel.  Fun di nokhmitog shuln kenen mir tsu fil nit dervartn - di kinder
veln zikh dortn oyslernen a lidele, a poemele vegn a yidishn yontev, a
bisele un take a bisele leyenen un shraybn, un a bisl yidishe legendes. 
Keyn gute lerer fun yidish veln fun di nokhmitogshuln nit aroyskumen.  Fun
di kaledzhes kumen aroys a bisl yidish redndike, ober zeyer shprakh iz a
shtolene un bagrenetste.  Yidish lebt, ober es iz troyerik oyfn harts. 

Der lerer Kazdan hot lange yorn gefodert men zol boyen yidishe togshuln
taynendik az nor azoyne shuln kenen farzikhern dem kium fun mame-loshn. Es
zaynen demolt geven fil nokh-milkhomedike imigrantn vos hobn mit di kinder
in der heym geredt Yidish un fil Amerikaner geboyrene vos hobn gekent a gutn
yidish.  Vel ikh itst nit arayngeyn in di yemoltike sikhsokhim beis
shul-konferentsn.  S'iz afile geven baym Arbeter-Ring a gresere sume gelt
far dem tsvek (vos ikh veys nit vos es iz dermit geshen).  Der Yidish
Natsyonaler Arbeter Farband hot a tsayt yo gehat a vizye un geefnt dray
togshuln in New York (di Kineret A', Kineret B' un eyne in Brighton. Trots
di groyse makhloykes tsvishn komitet-mitglider un di Pyonern Froyen
onfirershaft, vos hot deroyf gegebn groyse sumes gelt, (di merste makhloykes
zaynen geven vegn Yidish vs English), iz der hoypt limud geven yidish. Tsu
bislekh hobn naye shvakhere mentshn ibergenumen di firershaft funem shuln
komitet;  di groyse firer funem shuln-komitet zaynen oysgeshtorbn un es
zaynen arayngekumen naye mistome Amerikaner-geboyrene komitet-mitglider,
naye lerer , un mistome iz oykh geven der druk fun Isroel vayl epes iz dort
kale gevorn der eysik.

Itst shtelt zikh di frage: tsi hobn mir take farshpetikt di ban, oder ken
men khapn a shpetere ban?  Vos kenen mir ton vegn dem inien Yidishe
togshuln?  Vos zayt ir, vi a yokhid greyt tsu ton dervegn un vos iz ayer
organizatsye feik un vilig tsu ton oyf tsu farzikhern dem kium fun Yidish.
Genug geredt un gevorfn shmuts eyner oyfn andern.  S'iz di hekhste tsayt
zikh farkatshen di arbl un nemen tsu di keshenes.  Ikh bet aykh tsu shraybn
direkt tsu mir oder/un durkh Mendele. Ikh hof az mir veln bikorev anshtot
tsu zogn "di shtarbndike shprakh vos zogt zikh op fun shtarn", zogn "di
lebedike shprakh vos lebt un vet lebn"!!! 

Mit hartsike, vareme, khavershe grusn,

Ayer,

Feygl Infeld Glezer

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 15 Jul 1999 12:20:37 -0400 (EDT)
From: Fred Sherman <fred@sherm.com>
Subject: Di Gojim and Gojim

I am alarmed at the interest in Yiddish music by all these goyim. Don't they
realize how dead Yiddish is? Gentiles singing Yiddish music, Japanese
professors teaching Yiddish to Israelis--if things keep going on like this,
g_d knows what will happen. 

Fred Sherman

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 16:21:22 -0400 (EDT)
From: Lowlands-L Administrator <sassisch@yahoo.com>
Subject: "Di Gojim and Gojim"

Many thanks to Stanley (Zalman) Matoren for his piece about East European
Jewish music and Yiddish songs performed by European Gentiles ("Di Gojim and
Gojim" -- Mendele Vol 09.015, 7). 

He writes:
   What do you think of the revival in Europe, both East and West, of the
   interest in Yiddish music (klezmer) by groups of non-Jewish performers?
   This movement began in some cases as long ago as a quarter of a century.

I am quite sure -- based on my personal experience -- that it goes back
farther than that, at least to the early 1960s.  However, it may well be
correct to say that the history of major recording activities goes back no
farther than to the mid 70s.  Furthermore, Northwest European Gentile
interest in Jewish music goes beyond klezmer music.  It includes lyrical,
theatrical and spiritual pieces as well.  It is, however, true to say that
popular interest has been reinforced more recently by the burgeoning of what
might be seen as an international klezmer music "revival" and the relative
ease with which one can have one's music published these days (on CDs). 

Jewish music, both Ashkenazi and Sephardi, has long had its admirers, even
fanatics, among non-Jews in post-war Western Europe, though admittedly by a
minority.  Although I am aware of some activities in other countries, I can
competently speak only of Germany.  I understand that the Holocaust
awareness campaign in that country stimulated far more interest in Jewish
history and culture than is known by those who rely mostly on selective and
washed-down information provided by centralized international press
agencies.  There has been, for the past fifty-odd years, a flood of German
language publications on Jewish topics, and numerous Yiddish and Hebrew
works have been published in German translation.  Publications such as those
by the Swiss Salcia Landmann helped to create an interest and appreciation
of the Yiddish language in German-speaking areas.  Jewish music recordings
have always found a keen audience in post-war Germany.  In Hamburg I
attended several concerts featuring Yiddish music and song performed by
artists from several countries in packed houses.  Moreover, some German
artists, though not all that many that were then considered "marketable,"
have included Jewish, especially Yiddish, songs in their repertoires. 
Yiddish songs played important parts in the folk music movement of the 1960s
in Germany and other West European countries.  These tended to be performed
in special international folk music clubs, mostly by non-Jews.  Personally I
have had the pleasure of listening to some splendid performances of Yiddish
songs by non-Jews, based on solid language and culture study.  However,
hardly any of these performances were recorded.  The movement grew out of a
branch of a post-war sub- or counter-culture and was not considered
economically exploitable then.  It seems that this is now changing, probably
thanks to the discovery of klezmer music by the larger recording studios
around the world. 

Music tends to be at the forefront of crossing ethnic boundaries.  Ethnic
apartheid in folk music is a thing of the past, as is musical gender
division (e.g., women now performing sea chanteys and other work songs
originally considered strictly male domains).  Yidishe lider oys goyishe
moyler?  Why not indeed?  So what if the old pronunciation needs a bit
tweaking here and there?  We can deal with that. 

Best regards,

Reinhard "Ron" Hahn
Seattle, USA

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 16 Jul 1999 16:30:01 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Mikhl Herzog" <mherzog@bestweb.net>
Subject: French expressions in Yiddish

Harold Orbach's question (9.018) about French expressions in Yiddish calls
to mind Max Weinreich's report of the _di pa'rshive remi'ze_ (in Vilna?)--as
I recall, the place where the firefighters parked their equipment,
apparently derived from French _remise por chevaux_, the location where
Napolean's soldiers billeted their horses. 

Mikhl Herzog
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.020

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



