
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.153
May 13, 1999

[Moderator's note: This special issue of Mendele reprints Janet Hadda's
article "Yiddish in today's America". Mendele subscribers may be interested
to learn that some of our discussions resonate beyond the virtual space into
the _real_ world. Janet Hadda starts by describing a 1997 Mendele discussion
about the relevancy of Weinreichs' Yiddish phrasebook to tackle the larger
issue of the future of Yiddish. For some people it may be very difficult to
agree with Janet Hadda's main conclusion: that Yiddish is dead. My letter to
the Editor, reprinted below, is an expression of such a difficulty. Mendele
welcomes other opinions on this important and sensitive issue.

Janet Hadda's article was published in the Jewish Quarterly - one of the
best Jewish literary and cultural journals in English. Founded in 1953 by
Jacob Sonntag, JQ has been consistently dedicating prominent space to the
Yiddish literature and culture. The journal has featured translations from
Yiddish classical and modern fiction, drama, and poetry, including the works
of Sholem Aleichem, Y. L. Peretz, Sh. An-ski, Der Nister, Avram Stencil,
Jacob Glatstein, Yitzhak Katsenelson, David Sfard, and Chaim Sloves, among
others. The Jewish Quarterly has always paid special attention to Soviet
Yiddish literature.  Some of the first English translations from Shmuel
Halkin, David Hofshteyn, Peretz Markish, Zelik Akselrod, Moishe Teyf,
Alexander Belousov appeared in its pages. Literary criticism was represented
by the articles of Chimen Abramsky, Leonard Prager, Chone Shmeruk. Hopefully
the journal will carry this tradition into the next century. I would like to
thank JQ editor Matthew Reisz for the permission to reprint Janet Hadda's
article and my letter in Mendele. JQ has a web site featuring the journal's
tables of contents, selected materials, and subscription details
(http://ortnet.ort.org/communit/jq).                      - Iosif Vaisman]

1) Yiddish in today's America (Janet Hadda)
2) The life and death of Yiddish (Iosif Vaisman)
3) Response to Iosif Vaisman's letter (Janet Hadda)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 30 Apr 1999 17:19:35 -0700
From: Janet Hadda <hadda@ucla.edu>
Subject: Yiddish in today's America

    [Published in the Jewish Quarterly, no.170, Summer 1998. 
    Reprinted with permission]

Popular wisdom has it that the Yiddish language is making a comeback in the
United States and elsewhere. While I see no evidence of such a renaissance,
there is definitely a Yiddish phenomenon in American culture. People are
yearning for a connection to Yiddish as never before - or, at least,
differently from ever before. I would like to try and describe the form of
this yearning, suggest a psychological reason for it, and offer some
speculations about the future.

Yiddish culture in America - like Gaul - is divided into three parts: 
erudite, informed and popular. Although my experiences at the university
level are fundamental to all my ideas about Yiddish, I will focus on
informed and popular cultural manifestations.

Concerning informed Yiddish culture, I notice two remarkable developments: 
the proliferation of communal activity, such as Yiddish festivals, and
Yiddish postings on the Web, notably the bulletin board 'Mendele'. While not
exclusively American in its membership, Mendele was started in the US and,
from what I can tell, most of its membership is in the US. Democratic in
concept and practice, Mendele has a life of its own: participants freely
post news, questions, comments and responses to other postings. The level of
knowledge ranges from ameratses to bekiyes; the temperature ranges from cool
to incendiary.

Last June, I followed a particularly engrossing discussion on Mendele. The
stimulus for this exchange was an article by Michael Chabon in the June/July
1997 issue of Civilization, the magazine of the Smithsonian Institute.
Entitled 'Guidebook to a Land of Ghosts', the essay was a meditation on the
poignant irrelevance of Uriel and Beatrice Weinreich's 1958 Say it in
Yiddish. Chabon, who does not know Yiddish, mused about the futility of such
phrases as: 

  What is the flight number? 
  I need something for a tourniquet
and
  Can I go by boat/ferry to . . .?

Where and when, in 1958 and subsequently, would these expressions ever have
been useful? Chabon asks. After playing around for a while with the notion
of a Mediterranean Yiddishland or one in Alaska (or Alyeska), he gets to the
heart of his argument:

  The Weinreichs are taking us home, to the 'old country'. To Europe. 
  In this Europe the millions of Jews who were never killed produced
  grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren. 
  The countryside retains large pockets of country people whose first 
  language is still Yiddish, and in the cities there are many more for 
  whom Yiddish is the language of kitchen and family, of theater and 
  poetry and scholarship. A surprisingly large number of these people are 
  my relations... For my relatives, although they will know some English, 
  I will want to trot out a few appropriate Yiddish phrases, more than
  anything as a way of re-establishing the tenuous connection between us.

These words resonated deeply for me: I remember vividly how, as I started my
academic career, my colleagues would go off every summer to Germany, Austria
or Norway, and I would be reminded that there was no Yiddishland that I
could go to. Already 20 years ago, I worried that perhaps I was perpetuating
a dream by teaching my students the Yiddish words for 'marshmallow' and
'stereo'.

Chabon concludes this sombre contemplation by wondering what it means to
come 'from a culture that no longer exists' and to speak 'a language that
may die in this generation'. Perhaps it was these words that inflamed
Mendele's readers; perhaps it was the very idea of questioning the total
vibrancy of Yiddish. In any case, there was a hue and cry that went on for
days and that contained, in addition to a response from Mr Chabon himself,
such comments as:

  How many hundreds, even thousands, of labourers must be employed by
  Yiddish-speaking Hasidim in the New York area in service industries,
  retail and domestic work, or any number of other sectors of an
  often-underground Hasidic economy (such as the cash-only construction
  trades)? . . . How many such workers - and one thinks especially of
  shabes-goyim - might benefit immensely, might draw tremendous advantage,
  from learning those basic Yiddish skills that would allow them to
  significantly alter the emotional and psychological footing on which they
  must interact with their Yiddish-speaking employers? (Ron Robboy)

and:

  Listen up friend Chabon. A number of us have gotten together and created a
  dictionary of chemistry, in Yiddish!! (I hope it will come out in a short
  time) . . . And who needs it . . . ?? WE need it because it is our Yiddish
  CULTURE . . . for the same reason that the Guide for travellers is needed
  . . . throughout the world . . . (Mendy Fliegler) 

I think that the Mendele controversy illuminates the current situation. 
Some Mendelyaner feel compelled to defend not only the existence of Yiddish
but also its growth. Yet the very argument is flawed; the need to assert
that a language is thriving implies doubt. No one makes comparable
pronouncements about Spanish, Chinese, or even Flemish. 

Rabboy, in his reply to Chabon, quotes Max Weinreich's marvellous bon mot,
'A language is a dialect with an army and a navy.' But - even without a
military establishment - no one disputes the independence of Yiddish. No one
disputes that, pace Weinreich, Yiddish has continued to exist in goles (in
the Diaspora) for a millennium.

At issue is the future. What will happen next? Dictionaries of chemistry do
not prove that a language is flowering. The effort to produce such works
indicates that those who love Yiddish cannot bear to acknowledge that an era
has ended. Yiddish is not the only language that is endangered. Of the 175
American Indian languages still extant today in the United States, only 20
are now spoken by mothers to their babies, and an additional 55 are used by
ten or fewer tribal members. Linguists estimate that, because of increased
communication and a globalized economy, about half of the world's 6,000
languages are expected to become extinct within the next century. But Chabon
puts his finger on the ultimate cause and the anguished refusal to accept
the truth: Yiddish did not die out because of television or the European
Economic Community - it was murdered. Like the survivors themselves, Yiddish
is tenacious and plucky, filled with insight and information. But tenacity
and pluckiness do not bestow immortality; only speakers can do that, and
only as long as they and their culture are one.

I now want to propose a psychoanalytic explanation for the argument that
Yiddish is just fine, thank you. Those who continue to speak the language
and those who love it are mourning its death throes. As mourners, we are
behaving in ways well recognized by practitioners and well delineated by
theorists. You may be thinking that the loss of a language or a culture is
something quite different from the loss of a person, and of course it is. 
Yet the notion that people mourn objects and ideas as well as people is not
new. At the beginning of his seminal 1917 paper, 'Mourning and Melancholia'
(Volume XIV of the Standard Edition), Freud noted: 'Mourning is regularly
the reaction to the loss of a loved person, or to the loss of some
abstraction which has taken the place of one, such as one's country,
liberty, an ideal, and so on.' More recently, Heinz Kohut suggested that
cultural possessions can provide psychological sustenance, especially in
times of crisis.

Psychoanalytic literature contains diverse descriptions of the mourning
process, but all writers on the subject agree that denial is a typical first
response to loss. Although twentieth-century Americans often use the words
'in denial' pejoratively, denial is a powerful psychological tool;  denial
can help cushion a blow that, if faced squarely, would be intolerable.

The most influential psychoanalytic writer on mourning is Britain's John
Bowlby. Bowlby came to his ideas about mourning from his work with infants
and their responses to separation from their parents. Amplifying his
observations with information from animal behaviour studies, he eventually
reached generalizations about the larger subject of separation and mourning
in adults. (See, for example, his paper, 'Process of Mourning',
International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, XLII, Parts 4-5, 1961.)  Bowlby
divides the mourning process into three fluid stages: (1) attempted recovery
of the lost loved one, (2) disorganization and despair, and (3) 
reorganization. In the first phase - attempted recovery - the mourner
remains focused on the absent person. Repeated efforts are made to achieve
reunion, and when these endeavours fail, as they must in the case of death,
the griever frequently fantasizes that reconnection will yet occur. Anger,
weeping, protest and accusations all mark this first stage. As infants,
every one of us learned that crying and other displays of distress usually
succeed in bringing back the truant parent; these demonstrations also
admonished the parent against future wandering. Weeping, protest, anger and
the demand for reunion are thus adaptive infant responses to temporary loss.
These behaviours have been reinforced - either by evolution or learning -
precisely because they are effective in communicating that the missing
parent had better return immediately.

Adults employ these same strategies when separation results from death,
although the gambits look superficially different: 'It can't be true that
you are gone. How dare you leave me! You can't leave me - I'll die without
you. If you come back, I'll never yell at you again. It's all the hospital's
fault! It can't be true that I'll never see you again. It can't be true.'

My understanding of the Yiddish Chemical Dictionary follows Bowlby's
insights. For many people who love Yiddish and who love those who spoke it,
the response to its demise is simply denial: 'Of course Yiddish cannot be
dying. It never has and it never will.'

The loss of the language is particularly intense because its speakers
perished catastrophically and unnaturally. The continued vitality of Yiddish
commemorates the dead and constitutes a small victory over the huge and
hideous injustice of history. Michael Chabon and his ilk, who threaten to
explode the fantasy, are the targets of accusation, protest and rage. In
contrast to those who want to pretend that Yiddish persists as it always
has, others - and these are the people I have encountered most frequently -
see the language as the symbol of a saintly, satisfied, impossibly perfect
society that existed at some point in the vague past. These romantics are
concerned principally with locating the cultural moments and places where
nostalgia and idealization may be nurtured. I suspect that the current
enthusiasm for klezmer music stems partly from the longing for a past that
is simple and freylekh (joyous), albeit sometimes in a minor key. Ditto for
the Yiddish-flavoured festivals that celebrate food, paper cutting and
wedding recreations.

Still other fans of Yiddish identify with its precarious position. In the
words of Ruth Wisse (Commentary, November 1997), they are 'Jewish (and
non-Jewish) spokesmen for gays and lesbians, feminists and neo-Trotskyites
[who] freely identify their sense of personal injury with the cause of
Yiddish' precisely because it was the language of millions of martyrs. Like
the consumers of klezmer-yiddishkayt, they seem not to care about how
Yiddish evolved over centuries and how it burst into the twentieth century
with its contradictions, conflicts, heady developments and difficult
choices. They seem not to be curious about the existence of Yiddish-speaking
manufacturers, linguists, political theorists, physicians and athletes.

Remembrance and cultural transmission are fine in themselves. But when they
are consistently isolated from other aspects of Eastern European Jewish
existence, they create a distorted picture of life in that time and place. 
As Bowlby would see it, this distortion is precious to those who cling to
it. The notion that everything connected with Yiddish and Eastern European
Jewry must be joyous and/or funny, even slapstick, is another form of
denial, a denial of death, and even of pain: 'That world must have been lots
of fun, filled with music, celebrations, and great food. Certainly it has no
connection to suffering.' How else are we to understand the year-round
dreydl (Hanukah top) and giant pickle that functioned as leitmotivs in a
recent production of 'Shlemiel the First,' based on a story by Isaac
Bashevis Singer?

I am well acquainted with the denial phase of mourning.  I spent years and
years believing that, if I kept teaching the Yiddish for 'marshmallow ' and
'stereo', there would one day be a practical use for these words. Like a
small child demanding the return of her mother, I stamped my foot at the
slipping away of mameloshn, as if my refusal to accept what was before my
eyes would reverse reality. Now, however, I inhabit the changeable space
between the second and third stages of mourning. 

It was during the writing of my Singer biography that I finally admitted to
myself that I could no longer hope for the continuity of Yiddish. I decided
that I wanted to use Bashevis's life as a means of illustrating, not only
his own sophistication, but also that of his culture. I naively assumed that
anyone who could view his work as the stuff of giant pickles was acting out
of ignorance. If readers had the proper information, they would surely
revise their opinions about Singer, about the Yiddish language, and about
the culture of Eastern European Jewry. Nothing doing. Instead of realizing
that Bashevis was much more than a benign, vegetarian, pigeon-feeding old
grandfather, people started asking me why I hated him.  This inability to
accept Bashevis's personality in all its complexity has a strange reflection
in Dvorah Telushkin's memoir of her relationship with him, Master of Dreams
(New York: William Morrow, 1997). Throughout the book, she attempts to
create a Yiddish accent, which consists of using a 'v' for every 'w', as in
'vhen' and 'vhy', and a double 'e' in 'we', which therefore emerges as
'vee'. Few of the reviews even alluded to this tacky and inaccurate
manoeuvre, let alone questioned it. Telushkin's book further highlights the
sad scene I have outlined. The picture includes aficionados who deny that
Yiddish is in trouble, admirers who appreciate the language because its
speakers suffered, and lovers of a simplicity that simply never existed.

Is Yiddish in America finished, then? I don't think so. We have the YIVO
(Institute for Jewish Research), the Forverts, and the National Yiddish Book
Center. Moreover, Yiddish does indeed have a place where it is thriving and
where transmission is organic and natural. That place is the English
language.

My favourite examples of an evolving Yiddish literature are writings that
blend English and Yiddish into a new entity. First, just consider Singer's
translations of his own work into English.  At some point during his long
years in New York, I believe he actually began to think in English; then he
wrote in a Yiddish style that translated smoothly into English. Certainly,
his later works are far less idiomatic than his earlier ones. He even
stipulated that his oeuvre be canonized in English. 

The capacity to blend English with Yiddish, or to move fluidly between
English and Yiddish, however, depends on knowledge of both languages. The
problem we are facing today is precisely that only a shrinking number of
people still possess that knowledge. Moreover, the possibilities for
developing near-native fluency in Yiddish are on the wane, at least in the
secular world. Still, a sensibility to the flavour of Yiddish wondrously
persists.  People who read Singer at his best in translation can savour that
flavour, as can, for that matter, people who read certain works by Saul
Bellow. I have also been seeing the spirit of Yiddish in English, in the
work of authors who do not know Yiddish, for several years. This is a corpus
that, however small and pale in comparison to the original, nonetheless
provides a form of access to the realm of Yiddish. 

A wonderful example can be found in the writings of Steve Stern. While
several stories illustrate his debt to Yiddish, Stern explicitly credits the
language and Eastern European Jewish culture with expanding, indeed
unleashing, his creativity in 'The Ghost and Saul Bozoff', which appears in
the collection Lazar Malkin Enters Heaven (New York: Viking, 1986). An
effete young writer, Saul is transformed when he encounters the ghost of
Leah Rosenthal, who transmits to him a wealth of literary subjects from her
own experience, including 'a perpetual blizzard of feathers in the
pillow-making sweatshop, eternal spring in the paper-flower factory, clothes
hung in the airshafts like flags at a naval regatta . . . flaming bodies
that plummeted from the Triangle Shirtwaist Company like a flight of
phoenixes.'

Since reading Stern, I've noticed many additional hints of Yiddish in the
writing of Anglophone authors who do not know the language. Art Spiegelman,
in Maus I and II (New York: Pantheon, 1986 and 1991) has his father Vladek
speak two types of English: he is Vladek, the native speaker of Yiddish, and
he is Vladek the immigrant, grappling with English. The European battling
for his life utters an impassioned plea to his wife: 'Until the last moment
we must struggle together! I need you! And you'll see that together we'll
survive.' But the immigrant who is retelling the story concludes: 'This
always I told to her.' He tells his American-born son:  'Help yourself for a
little cereal . . . Okay, if not, is not. Only just try then a piece from
this fruit cake . . . I want only you'll enjoy here the summer with me.'

The technique of rendering native and non-native speech in English is
certainly not new; Henry Roth did it superbly in Call it Sleep. But there
the point was to show that the same person who butchered English was also
capable of eloquence. For Roth, it was a clever way of highlighting the
immigrant plight while simultaneously reminding the reader that being
limited in English by no means signified lack of refinement. Spiegelman's
use of a similar technique, by contrast, suggests that Vladek was once
effective and courageous but that now he is a weak old man, forced to
communicate in ways that Artie finds both ludicrous and infuriating. 
Nonetheless, Spiegelman's content emphasizes the modernity and initiative
that thrived in pre-Holocaust Jewish Eastern Europe, even as his form is
quintessentially American. 

In another moving example, Pearl Abraham's poignant novel, The Romance
Reader (New York: Riverhead Books, 1995; London: Quartet, 1996) uses what
might be called Hasidic English to contrast the values of the protagonist's
Satmer father with the young woman's own search for freedom through secular
literature. The father puts it bluntly: 'The Jews escaped slavery in Egypt
because of three things,' he says, quoting from the Humash, swaying as if
he's studying. 'Name, dress, and language. You two call each other by your
goyishe names, Rachel instead of Ruchel; you speak a goyishe language; and
now you're changing the way you dress. I will not have any of that in this
house. This is a hasidishe home.' The prose is not Yiddish, of course, but
the echo of Yiddish lies beneath the surface. And, with this method, Abraham
creates an American novel that evokes the stultifying atmosphere of
old-world Hasidism and at the same time convincingly portrays the quest to
escape.

Where to draw the line with respect to authenticity and aesthetic
acceptability is another matter. To use food as a cultural illustration, I
recently read that, the more accepted an ethnic dish becomes, the larger
(i.e. the more American) its size. Enormous, doughy bagels available at
Dunkin Donuts and on American Airlines prove the point. Once a food has been
adopted, it can be adapted to the majority culture's needs and tastes, as in
chicken croissants, blueberry bagels and, in Arizona, Navajo bagels.

So what does it mean when the Yiddish language, the Holocaust, and the Golem
all appear in a novel by an Irish-American? I am not making this up:  the
work is Pete Hamill's Snow in August (New York: Warner, 1997). Set in the
mid-1940s, the book concerns an unusual friendship. At the age of 11,
Michael Devlin is a good Irish Catholic youngster with more than his share
of woe. Rabbi Judah Hirsch is a Holocaust survivor from Prague, now
presiding over a Brooklyn shul that has seen much better days. Both Michael
and the rabbi have endured great loss - Michael's father has been killed in
the war and the rabbi has lost his wife in the camps. The two also share the
experience of being persecuted by a local roughneck, Frankie McCarthy, and
his cronies. After they meet in a bashert (fated) kind of way, Michael and
the rabbi arrange a project of reciprocal education: the rabbi will teach
Michael Yiddish and Michael will tutor the rabbi in baseball. Michael
discovers the Golem and the rabbi not only discovers Jackie Robinson but
also attends a game in Ebbets Field.

At the end of the novel, as the rabbi lies in the hospital after an
antisemitic incident at the hands of Frankie McCarthy's gang, Michael
succeeds in bringing the Golem to life in Brooklyn. After 'whispering an Our
Father', the boy utters the proper incantations and is rewarded with a Golem
who is 'as dark as Jackie Robinson'. The Golem quickly takes care of
Frankie's gang, heals the rabbi and smuggles him out of the hospital and
back to the synagogue, along the way restoring the sanctuary to its former
glory. Not content with that, the Golem fills the space with the six million
kdoyshim (martrys), including the rabbi's wife, Leah. Husband and wife,
reunited at last, step out onto the roof to dance the dance that Hitler had
prevented. 

What is wrong here? Hamill records with admirable accuracy Michael's Yiddish
lessons and his subsequent use of the language. He has done his homework on
Jewish folklore and history. Hamill grew up among Jews in Brooklyn and,
according to a recent interview in Tikkun magazine, wrote the novel 'as a
thank you to Jewish culture, because it taught [him] three things that [he]
wanted to pass along. Moral intelligence, irony, and tenacity'. But the book
fails because its flavour is inauthentic. It is a literary blueberry bagel.
No writer familiar with Yiddishkayt would have a character say an 'Our
Father' and then call up a Golem who looks like Jackie Robinson.

But it is precisely the failure to distinguish between what is authentic and
what is not that forms the plight of Yiddish in American culture today. 
Snow in August is being made into a film, and I imagine it has a chance of
being successful. Many people will probably agree with Pulitzer Prize winner
Frank McCourt, author of Angela's Ashes, who says of the book: 'When you
finish that roller-coaster last chapter you'll wonder if the shade of Isaac
Bashevis Singer whispered in his ear.'

Like the bagel, Yiddishkayt has entered the American mainstream, although
its cultural translation scarcely resembles the original. But I can report
that the love of Yiddish, vulgarized and filled with error though it may be,
continues unabated and right up to the minute. As I was writing these
remarks, I found the following advertisement in a fancy food shop near UCLA: 

He'Brew - The Chosen Beer. Gourmet kosher microbrew with chutzpah. Shmaltz
Brewing Company is committed to crafting great beer and great shtik for the
Jewish community and beyond . . . L'Chaim! To shmooze with Global
Headquarters . . . surf www.shmaltz.com. 

Janet Hadda

     Janet Hadda is Professor of Yiddish at the University of California,
     Los Angeles, and a practising psychoanalyst. Her latest book is Isaac
     Bashevis Singer: A life (Oxford University Press).

     A different version of this paper was delivered at a conference in
     April 1998 on 'Yiddish in the Contemporary World' held by the Oxford
     Institute for Yiddish Studies; it will also be included in a book of
     the same name (edited by Dr Gennady Estraikh and Dr Mikhail Krutikov)
     to be published in January 1999 by Legenda Press of the University of
     Oxford. 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 3 May 1999 00:32:21 -0400 (EDT)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: The life and death of Yiddish

    [Edited version of this letter was published in the Jewish Quarterly,
    no.172, Winter 1998/99. Reprinted with permission]

George Steiner once noted that "there is in certain branches of modern
literary criticism a covert distaste for literature". This phenomenon,
which is probably caused by an unconscious desire to alienate oneself from
one's subject of study, acquired unusual forms in the academic world of
Yiddish language and literature. Recently, more than one of the leading
Yiddish scholars proclaimed that their subject is dead. Janet Hadda's
article "Yiddish in today's America" (no.170, Summer 1998) shows that she
also joined this club.

The topic of death of Yiddish in general, and in America in particular, is
not new. In 1904 one of the founders of Conservative Judaism, Solomon
Schechter, wrote that America, as "someone rightly remarked, is the grave
of languages. No foreign language ... survives a single generation in this
country... [Yiddish] is a mere accident in our history, doomed to die, and
is dying before our very eyes." The century that separates us from this
observation has not been particularly benevolent towards Yiddish to say
the least, but despite all odds the language survived, outlasting many
doomsayers and ill-wishers.

The latest strain of "death of Yiddish" pronouncements is more troublesome
than earlier ones for several reasons. Firstly, the language indeed
suffered a lot, and is now much more vulnerable than 60 or 90 years ago. 
Secondly, current attempts of public interment for the first time
are made not by the enemies of Yiddish, but by the professional
Yiddishists, which significantly raises credibility of their conclusions
even if they are somewhat at odds with the facts. Yiddish studies as an
academic discipline were born earlier in this century as a result of a
marriage between the ideology (Yiddishism) and scholarship, and for the
Yiddishists of the past the overwhelming (and often quixotic) dedication to
the cause was almost a part of the job description. Not any more - the
romantic period is over, sentiments and allegiances cleared the way for the
pragmatism and cold prudence.

As a moderator of Mendele, an Internet-based Yiddish language and culture
discussion forum (http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html) I was
pleased that Professor Hadda used a discussion on Mendele for her study.
Although she correctly pointed out that the majority of Mendele
subscribers live in the US, the group is truly international. Almost 500
out of 1,700 subscribers live in 35 other countries on six continents,
some of them in places like Iceland, Spain, or South Korea, that are not
often associated with Yiddish. Of course, such geographical distribution
together with the very fact of the existence and vibrancy of Mendele,
accurately described by Janet Hadda, do not prove anything about the state
of Yiddish. However, they may serve as an indicator that the language is
not that dead as we are lead to beleive and that the Yiddish phrase book
for travelers, discussed in Mendele and in Hadda's article is not that
"irrelevant". 

JQ readers interested in further details of the debate on the relevancy of
the Weinreichs' phrasebook may look up the Mendele archives on the Web. 
Here I would bring up just one, and very unintellectual argument: the
marketplace test.  "Say it in Yiddish", first published in 1958, is still
in print. Its "sales rank" in the Amazon.com, a very large online
bookseller, is practically the same as the sales rank of Janet Hadda's
1997 biography of Isaac Bashevis Singer, and much higher than sales ranks
of thousands of other books in the comparable categories.

A desire to find the signs of death on the living organism can easily
carry away from objectivity.  Summarizing the remarks of the participants
in the Mendele discussion Hadda writes:  "I think that the Mendele
controversy illuminates the current situation.  Some Mendelyaner feel
compelled to defend not only the existence of Yiddish but also its growth.
Yet the very argument is flawed; the need to assert that a language is
thriving implies doubt. No one makes comparable pronouncements about
Spanish, Chinese, or even Flemish." Here Professor Hadda is wrong.  They
do make comparable pronouncements about the abovementioned and many other
languages.  "[Our] mother tongue has already won for itself such an
unequaled empire over the modern world ... language which is perhaps to
play a predominant part in the future progress of mankind".  Did the need
for such an assertion arise from doubt in the langauge fate?  Unlikely.
Sir Winston Churchill must have been quite confident in his native
English. "No language in the world is comparable to ours, in terms of the
length of its history and the purity and accomplishment of its systems" -
another assertion, here the language in question is Chinese. These and
hundreds of other similar examples from 76 languages can be found in
Joshua Fishman's "In Praise of the Beloved Language: A Comparative View of
Positive Ethnolinguistic Consciousness"  (Berlin, New York: Mouton de
Gruyter, 1997).  Positive ethnolinguistic consciousness is exactly what is
missing from Janet Hadda's article and from the works of her similarly
minded colleagues. 

However, a far greater misconception is revealed in the following quote: 
"Is Yiddish in America finished, then? I don't think so. We have the YIVO
(Institute for Jewish Research), the Forverts, and the National Yiddish
Book Center. Moreover, Yiddish does indeed have a place where it is
thriving and where transmission is organic and natural. That place is the
English language."  With all due (and most sincere) respect to the listed
institutions and environments, it is incomprehensible to me how hundreds
of thousands of native Yiddish speakers could have been omitted from this
formula.  Unfortunately, Professor Hadda is not the only one who does not
see the Yiddish-speaking Hasidic communities. Several years ago Yiddish
was entered into the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages as a
"seriously endangered language". The book defines a seriously endangered
language as a "language with a more substantial number of speakers
(comparing to the next category of "nearly extinct" languages with
maximally tens of elderly speakers), but practically without children
among them." It's not where we are now.  While Yiddish can probably reap
some small benefits from this "red book" status, in the long run it may do
more harm by creating a distorted image of a disappearing language. It is
true, Yiddish has changed, but it did not die. It is firmly rooted in many
Orthodox communities in the US, Europe and Israel. Its future in the
secular world is more problematic, but it is not an agony, accompanied by
"the anguished refusal to accept the truth". Ironically, one of the hopes
for the secular Yiddish culture might be connected to the severe identity
crisis that many Jews suffer today.  Searches for ways out of this crisis
may bring about a renewed interest in Yiddish as a vehicle for cultural
identification. 

I don't feel competent to discuss author's psychoanalytical hypotheses,
but I would like to question her thesis about the possibility of
transferring Yiddish literature into the English language. Many years ago,
a prominent Yiddish scholar and educator Abraham Golomb posed this very
question in his essay "Rambam or Maimonides":  "Can a Jewish work in a
non-Jewish language achieve immortality among Jews?  Among the living
Jewish people?" His answer based on the historical analysis was firm: "It
has never happened till now." Could it happen in the future? I don't know.
Most modern scientists consider language and culture as integral parts of
a unified semiotic space, which needs all its components for proper
functioning. What I do know is that, as of today, Yiddish has not
exhausted its vital energy and its potential for the future.  And we have
nothing to gain and a whole lot to lose by prematurely proclaiming it
dead.

Iosif Vaisman
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 10 May 1999 07:25:34 -0700
From: "Janet Hadda" <hadda@ucla.edu>
Subject: Response to Iosif Vaisman's letter

I am pleased that Mendele is posting my article, originally published in the
London Jewish Quarterly.  I hope my reaction to Iosif Vaisman's letter to
the JQ will help further our discussion concerning the future of Yiddish.

Like any author, I appreciate strong reactions to my ideas.  I believe,
however, that some readers have misunderstood both my arguments and my
intentions.  Certainly, some have missed my pain. 

We are about to lose the authentic continuity of a culture.  I am anguished
as I contemplate the death of Eastern European Yiddishkeyt and its
international offshoots.  That culture was, within my memory, ablaze with
creative brilliance, intellectual authority, and moral potency.  Its
suppleness easily encompassed feisty controversy and intricate sensibility,
quick-witted humor and unhurried mourning.  The language of that culture was
Yiddish.  I am disheartened to observe the bland and often superficial
substitutes that represent a helpless attempt to fill the void left by the
passing of such a fertile heritage. 

To some, my pessimism is an ill-judged betrayal.  While I think that such an
assessment is incorrect, I acknowledge that my article neglects two
phenomena that are potentially comforting. 

First, there are those who continue to teach and to speak Yiddish.  The
families of Drs. Mordkhe Schaechter and Joshua Fishman, and the generation
that follows them, speak Yiddish to their children.  Others -- and here I
include myself -- continue to dedicate themselves to teaching and research.
They, we, can be considered a source of hope, however measured. 

Second, as Professor Vaisman states, the Hasidim will certainly somehow
contribute to the future of Yiddish in America.  Those communities, however,
while Yiddish-speaking, are resolutely separate from the world I discuss. 
Their relationship to non-Hasidic Jews lacks the common idiom that made
conversation in Yiddish natural before World War II.  When Hasidic renegades
arise, as they surely must, will they use Yiddish to communicate their
modernism, as did their rebel counterparts a century ago? 

And who will read them: other alienated Hasidim?  If they do write in
Yiddish, and if they do capture an audience, I will be delighted, but these
questions are unanswerable at present. 

Whatever evidence for hope can be adduced, the larger picture remains
somber.  I am alternately heartsick and enraged when I encounter what today
passes for Yiddishkeyt. Unfortunately, many of the people who proclaim the
renewal of Yiddish imagine that they understand the culture because they
have seen a mock shtetl wedding or learned a few Yiddish words. How could
they comprehend, for example, that Yankev Glatshteyn's famous poem, A gute
nakht, velt, received more than 200 impassioned literary and journalistic
responses when it appeared in 1938?  How would they ever grasp the fact that
-- at a time when their numbers were already waning -- Yiddish-speaking
Bundists and Communists in New York would no sooner have attended one
another's banquets than they would have joined the Republican Party? 

As Professor Vaisman mentions, I am not the only Yiddish scholar who has
come to grim conclusions about the viability of Yiddish.  Am I therefore
part of an elite club, membership in which requires an unconscious
alienation from the subject of my life's work?  While I confess to periodic
longings for the comfort and security of club memberships, I have never been
able to pull it off -- no high school clique, no college sorority,
definitely no old boys' network.  It is true, though, that -- with
like-minded people -- I have been looking for ways to move forward. 

My colleagues and I agree that the thriving pre-World War II Yiddish world
has permanently disappeared.  And we do not see authentic regeneration. 
However, although we believe we are facing what seems to be inevitable, we
would love nothing better than to be wrong.

Janet Hadda
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.153

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



