
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.041
August 11, 1998

1) English in Yiddish (Rukhl Eissenstat)
2) Yinglish (Yosef Gilboa)
3) English in Yiddish (Harvey Spiro)
4) English words in Yiddish (Shaya Mitelman)
5) Sholem Aleichem's Letter to Yoel Engel (Bob Freedman)
6) Yiddish (Feygl Infeld Glezer)
7) Yiddish & 'kvas' (Lucas Bruyn)
8) Yiddish in Israel - scholarly abstract (sylvia schildt)
9) Yiddish in Israel (David Herskovic)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 03:21:22 -0400 (EDT)
From: Eissenstat@aol.com
Subject: English in Yiddish

Tsulib dem vos ich bin a mame mit kleyne kinder, gefelt mir zeyer dos
yinglishe vertl "sharapnikl" far "pacifier" oder "soske". Es kumt fun
"sharap"(shut up), un punkt azoy hot mayn eygene mame gezogt far "shvayg" tsu
mir. Khotch zi hot gekent az es is "shut up" ven zi hot defart gebn aza
geshray,is es aroysgekumen "sharap".Nor grine voltn azoy geredt, un fun dem
geshafn "sharapnikl".  Ich meyn az aza vertl vos me ken nit farsheyn af
english iz a koshere yinglish-yiddish vort. Oych dermont es mir vos mayn tate
hot gezogt vegn dem Forvets-- az fun es leyen,hot er ongehoybn tsu lernen
English vayl 'siz geven azoy fil Englishe verter inem banutzed! Nu, iz do a
yidish vort far a "pull-up"?  A dank. 
                                              
Rukhl Eissenstat

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 04:06:34 -0400 (EDT)
From: AJ Gilboa <bfgilboa@weizmann.weizmann.ac.il>
Subject: Yinglish

Has anyone remembered to mention in this discussion the obvious fact that
English and Yiddish are both basically Germanic languages? Yinglish doesn't
seem so odd when viewed in this way, any more than the massive incorporation
of Aramaic roots, usages, etc. into Hebrew (as well as Yiddish). 

Yosef Gilboa

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 14:00:46 -0400 (EDT)
From: Harvey Spiro <hjs@nrc.gov>
Subject: English in Yiddish

Marjorie Schonhaut Hirshan asks (Mendele Vol 8.037) why yidishe lingvistn
sneer at commonly used Yiddish words that are derived from English.  Here are
a few thoughts from this non-linguist. 

The struggle for *pure Yiddish* was not just against English words.  At
different times, the Germanic, Slavic and Hebrew/Aramaic elements of Yiddish
have also come under attack. 

 To 18th century Berlin maskilim like Mendelssohn, Yiddish was a contaminated
German, and hence the roadblock to assimilation and opportunity.  To the 19th
century Russian Haskole (and to the Zionists), Yiddish was simply zhargon,
lacking the yikhus of loshen koydesh, and bearing the further stigma of
sounding like bad German. 

The influence of these two *enlightenment* movements, together with the rise
of German literacy among Jews in the 19th century, caused many Yiddish
speakers to infuse their Yiddish with daytshmerisms, which they felt added
sophistication (or legitimacy) to their proste mameloshn.  Sholem Aleichem
campaigned against daytshmerism, and publicly criticized the daytshmerish
Yiddish of the popular author Shomer. 

In an earlier generation, Mendele had protested against the proliferation of
excessive Slavicisms in Yiddish.  Sholem Aleichem*s writings are filled with
Russian and Ukrainian words, both as separate phrases and as integral parts
of his Yiddish.  Soviet Yiddish writers, in turn, were urged to strip their
Yiddish of Hebrew-Aramaic elements, because they recalled the religious
underpinnings of Yiddish that, of course, had no place in the Workers*
Paradise. 

Yet although America was good for the Jews as individuals, the
Yiddish-English connection was particularly dangerous for Yiddish.  Unlike
the broken promises of the European enlightenment movements, the promises of
the goldene medine were fulfilled.  In America, a Jew could be accepted as an
American, merely by learning English. 

When languages rub shoulders, they influence each other. When Ukrainians and
Jews lived in the same town, each one*s language influenced the other*s.  The
same is true for Polish and Russian, German and Dutch, and other languages
that share borders.  The English spoken in southern California and Texas has
much more Spanish vocabulary and word formations than that spoken in Glasgow,
Jamaica or New Delhi. 

But there*s the rub.  In pre-war Europe, Yiddish was a healthy, living
mameloshn, spoken by porters and innkeepers, accountants and doctors, and
most importantly by millions of children.  Even if it lacked borders and an
army, Yiddish could withstand and absorb the influences of neighboring
languages.  But in the goldene medine, the transition from vinde, next-doorke
and payde to no Yiddish at all took place in a generation, or less.

Under different circumstances, the addition of yet another layer to our
wonderful fusion tongue should have been no more threatening than is the
influence of Spanish (or, for that matter, Yiddish) on American English, that
other fusion language that most of us speak.  However, I think that many
Yiddishists find it particularly bitter that, at a time when Yiddish had
become an endangered species, in a country where it could be freely spoken
and printed, Jews themselves chose to abandon Yiddish. 

Harvey Spiro
Vienna, Virginia

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 8 Aug 1998 13:54:54 -0400 (EDT)
From: Serge Mitelman <simitelman@pol.net>
Subject: English words in Yiddish.

To think that there is some extraneous censorship that disallows us to use
English words sounds a bit too strong. Who are those academicians with the
hatred for all the things English? ( "Academie Yiddishais", as Harvey Varga
calls them; vol.08.039.8). Mordkhe Schaechter? Or maybe Mikhl Herzog?  I
believe we are free to use as many English words and Americanisms as we want
. As a matter of fact, this is exactly what the news section of "Forverts"
regularly does. With a bit of taste they could make nice localisms. We may
even speak pure English (which is easier), rather than substitute the
established Yiddish vocabulary. 

The situation is much worse than Marjorie Schonhaut Hirshan suggests
(vol.08.037:8). The proportion of Slavisms in the American Yiddish
publications is incomparably higher than it has ever been in Slavic-speaking
countries. Therefore, we can add that the "Academie Yiddishais" not only
censors out the Americanisms, but also selectively imposes on us numerous
Slavic derivatives. For example, the following poem (A gram, Zhohana
Yakubovich, Di Pen, #15, Oktober 1995) would never make it on the pages of
"Sovetish heymland" or "Di yidishe gas": 

Af vemen bistu podobne?
Af dem zun vos mir veln hobn.
A sharf ponim mit shvartse oygn.
Du zest oys teylmol azoy smutne
Az dayne oygn vern vi khmares,
Zey blondzhen ergets vayt in der velt, etc. (agev, vu iz der gram?)

To me - this is "a bezvkusitse" ( kakapitse, geshmaklozikayt). The
Russian-speaking community in New York, by analogy, has also "invented" some
beautiful local neologisms : chardzhat', endzhoyat', affordat', yuzat', etc.,
etc. Nobody, though, has yet called for their inclusion into the literary
Russian language. A tiny bit of literary exility would not harm us either. 

Shaya Mitelman.

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 16:14:59 -0400 (EDT)
From: Bob Freedman <yidsong@pobox.upenn.edu>
Subject: Sholem Aleichem Letter to Yoel Engel

In an article published in "Der Yud" (Krakow, 1901) Sholem Aleichem replied
to Yoel Engle who was critical of the characterization of Warshavsky's songs
as "Folkslider". The article was published in two parts in the Mlotek columns
of the Forward (Yiddish) of June 1 and June 15, 1984. Does anyone know
whether this article has been translated into English, and if so, where??? 

Bob Freedman

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 11:01:37 -0400 (EDT)
From: yiddish1@juno.com (Feigl I Glaser)
Subject: Yiddish

A yasher koyekh Leybl Botwinik, Sylvia schildt un ale di vos zaynen bemes,
fun gantsn hartsn, farinteresirt oyftsuhaltn Mame-Loshn.  Noyekh Miller un
andere vi er zaynen btokh tseshterer, nisht boyer fun Yidish.  Yidish tsu im
iz nor vikhtik, in zayne eygene verter, vi "instrumentale un sentimentale
sibes, ober nit vi an end-tsil".  "Vos es izyo vikhtikt, "zogt er, "iz di
toyznt yorike oyfklerndike geshikhte". 

Zayt mir moykhl, ober azelkhe ...yaner vi er, hobn biz ahergeholfn un helfn
vayter koylen di Yidishe shprakh mi ale ire oytsres.  Mentshn vi Sylvia
Schildt, Leybl Botvinik helfn boyen un shafn Yidishe shuln, Yidish reders un
ernste libhobers fun Yidish.  Ikh bin oykh mer farinteresirt in vayter tsien
un boyen dos tayere Yidishe vort, mayn, mayne eltern's, bobe-zeydes' un mayne
kinder's Mame-Loshn, vi tsu zukhn dem opshtam fun Yidishe verter un oysdrukn
(khotsh in gevise faln iz dos oykhet vikhtik). 

Ikh bin tsufridn az es iz faran a Mendele nets -- iber der gorer velt -- vos
iz ernst farinteresirt tsu lernen, redn un vayter antviklen Yidish -- nisht
gekukt oyf dem vos zeyer religyezer, sotsyaler oder politisher gloybn zol nit
zayn.  Zayt geshtarkt, khosheve Mendelyaner un Mendelyanerkes un ale
mitarbeters un mitglider funem nets vos helfn oysbreytern un antviklen Yidish
redn, Yidish zingen, Yidish shraybn un Yidish leyenen.  Un lomir take hofn,
az di Isroel medine un dos Yidntum in di farsheydene kvutses veln endlekh
helfn tsurik oyfboyen vos zey hobnt biz itst bavustzinik un aktiv geholfn
tseshtern - dos libe un heylike Yidishe vort. 
                                
Mit vareme grusn,
Feygl Infeld Glezer

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 15:30:11 -0400 (EDT)
From: "L.M. Bruyn" <troia@wxs.nl>
Subject: Yiddish & 'kvas'

In response to Sylvia Schildt:

First of all, I would like to support David S. Braun's motion to create some
clarity about the issue of Yiddish in Israel.  The contents of the law in
question were sketched by Leybl Botvinik in Mendele V05.258. 

The law seems to be aimed at propagating Yiddish culture in all its aspects.
The word 'school' or 'teaching' are not mentioned.  The interpretation given
by Sylvia Schildt: "Budget is for expansion of activities from 40 schools to
a much greater number -- I believe there are around 200 to 300 schools in the
land." seems to be a free interpretation of the law. 

Further I would like to remind my dear opponent that since the creation of
Israel several 'alies' have settled down in the country, to form a
multi-cultural society far different from what Zionist had imagined. If the
Israeli government passed a law in support of Yiddish Culture, I can only
imagine that it did so in the spirit of the new Israel, to enable all
cultural groups in Israel to show their best.  Finally I would like to remark
that the notion of "$1000 a plate dinners" sounds disgustingly American to my
ears as well. I know that Israel's survival largely depended and depends on
American funding, obtained through lobbying. The blessing is mixed. 

Could I interest Politico-Mendelist in an action for the re-introduction of
'kvas' in the former Soviet Union? Kvas, well known from Yiddish literature,
was the national soft drink for many centuries but has within a few years
time completely disappeared from the market. All factories were bought up and
liquidated by the two Cola companies. 

Lucas Bruyn.

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 8 Aug 1998 17:39:43 -0400 (EDT)
From: creativa@charm.net (sylvia schildt)
Subject: Facts/Yiddish in Israel/scholarly abstract

While surfing the net trying fruitlessly to locate the name and address of
the Minister of Education, I came upon an excellent pre-publication abstract,
which presents an in-depth and updated look at the issue of language in
Israel. It considers the antecedents of Hebrew (Turkish, English, Arabic,
etc.) from the Allenby days and explores firstly the moves toward
monolinguism and now the new moves to linguistic pluralism. It is a lengthy,
thoughtful and informative document with facts and figures about who speaks
what, what the forces are surroundeding the various linguistic groups, and of
course the role of Yiddish. It documents the changing role of Hebrew, even
the more threatening encroachment of English. 

I believe it puts our concerns over secular Yiddish education in a detailed
context. 

What amazes me is that, given the growing respect for multilingualism in
Israel, the acceptance by the Minister of Education of the importance of
"heritage languages" such as Yiddish (215,000 speakers) and Ladino (100,000)
speakers, the existence of Mrch 1996 Knesset law, that Yiddish has been so
glossed over. Perhaps some Israeli Mendelyaner in or out of the Yiddish clubs
and organizations, can enlighten us. 

sylvia schildt
baltimore, maryland

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 9 Aug 1998 11:37:19 -0400 (EDT)
From: David Herskovic <david@arctic1.demon.co.uk>
Subject: Yiddish in Israel

Yiddishistn who really care for Yiddish should, in my opinion, be thankful
that Israel never placed its hands on Yiddish and thus allowed Yiddish to
remain true to its roots as a Jewish language, the language it has always
been, and not acquire the ambiguous term of an Israeli language, with its
Jewishness vaguely defined. 

That Israel has done its utmost to the obliteration of Yiddish inside as well
as outside Israel should be a matter of regret for Israel rather than for
those concerned with the survival of Yiddish. For what future can a country
have if it seeks to deny the history of its own people to its own people? 

Let farbisene anti-Yiddishists pretend that Jewish history has a large void
between the revolt of Bar Kochba and the Basel conference. Those who know
better, though, know that there were quite a few years in between. And in
those years Jews lived eating foods other than falafel, spoke a vernacular
other than the modern parody of biblical Hebrew and lived in lands of steppes
and not in cliches of deserts blooming. 

Yiddish has always been the lingua franca of Ashkenazi Jews dispersed among
their non-Jewish neighbours. If Israel had or has a dream of creating a 'new'
kind of Jew unencumbered with 'Golus mentalities' then perhaps they indeed
have no need for the Yiddish language. But for proud Golus dwellers like
myself who, though awaiting their redemption, are enjoying every minute of it
while moshiach bids his time, for people like us Yiddish still has a function
to play, and an honourable one at that. 

It is the language of our past as well as our key to the future. To those
that the Holocaust means a lot more then ghetto resistance, as heroic as it
was, and visiting Auschwitz is more than trampling on sacred earth waving
flags and chanting 'Never Again' to those Yiddish is the language of their
ancestors which encapsulates within it their entire way of life. It is for
their lives and their way of living that were so cruelly annihilated that we
mourn and it is through their language that we remember and seek to pass it
on to our future generations. 

But if a country seeks to deny this heritage to its citizens then what hope
can the future hold for it with no past to look back to, how will they be
judged by future generations if their own past has been obliterated by state
imposed amnesia, and how can a country ever aspire for pluralism if whole
dialects have been rooted out and not even the ashkenazi pronunciation of
Hebrew nor Ashkenazi surnames have been allowed to survive? 

Selectiveness in history and culture is also only a step away from complete
ignorance. To prove this point try making a search for Hebrew poetry. One
will find nothing from Ibn Gevirol; no mention of Yehuda Halevi's evocative
'Tsion Halo Sishale...' in fact no medieval poetry whatsoever. And it's no
better with the modern poets. To date I have found one Tshernokhovski and one
Bialik, the Bialik not being his 'City of Slaughter' although Yevtushenko's
'Babi Yar' is readily available. 

And the difficulties of Hebrew on the web is no defence. Scores of pages full
of venom and hate concerning politics seem to find their place all too easily
despite the different languages. More to the point, the language barrier has
not stopped Refoyl Finkel and Andrei Bradstein, to name but two, from having
lovely collections of Yiddish poetry in Hebrew letters on their web sites. 

Those campaigning selflessly for the survival of Yiddish in what should be
the Jewish homeland deserve our full support, but in the clamour for
petitions and campaigns the greater message should not be lost. Yiddish has
survived greater tragedies than the Israeli persecution and Yiddish will
overcome this one too. If Israel is spiting anyone it is no one other then
themselves and it is they who will pay the price. 

David Herskovic
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.041

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



