
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.085
November 16, 1998

1) Regarding comments about Ruth Wisse (Ellen Prince)
2) Why Yiddish? (Joshua Kleiman)
3) a time to grieve or a time to build? (Iosif Vaisman)
4) Yiddish in the Haredi community (Hershl Goodman)
5) Vus bisti, ketsele, broyges? (Bob Poe)
6) Pedonye (Joel Rubin)
7) "Golden heels" (Arn Abramson)
8) Galitzyaner cooking (Anita Schonhaut Appelbaum)
9) Introduction (Gail Gaston)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 12 Nov 1998 20:05:17 -0500 (EST)
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: Regarding Comments about Ruth Wisse

Bruce Mitchell denies that he has 'bashed' Ruth Wisse. However, his
opening
line is:

"In response Dovid Robboy's recent message, I can only express my
total
dismay that a self-professed academic can call a language spoken by
at least
200,000. Americans (1990 U.S. census figures - a fact, not emotional
dismay,
prejudice, politics, etc.) "dead".

'Self-professed academic'??? Last I heard, Dr. Wisse was a chaired
professor
of Yiddish literature at Harvard University. I would think that even Mr.
Mitchell's Oxford would take the holder of such a position to be an
academic, no 'self-professing' needed. I will not comment on the
accuracy of
his quote nor on the odds that he has actually read anything by her. 

Gail Gaston says of Wisse: 

"If she loves the language, culture and literature as David stated she
did,
she should be fighting to preserve it.  That's what takes real courage,
not
facing the grief of losing it. I am not a Yiddish scholar, an "old crank" or
a part of the "haredim".  I just think that Yiddish is worth preserving and
in that context, I will be attending a program at the University of
Arizona,
Tucson." 

Well, that's really super -- but would not Wisse's spending her entire
professional life researching Yiddish literature and teaching it,
including
teaching it to some of the brightest young people in the world as a
chaired
professor at Harvard, count almost as much in the
Yiddish-preservation
effort as your attending a week-long non-credit summer school
program??? 

Ellen Prince

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 13 Nov 1998 06:59:22 -0500 (EST)
From: JGKleiman@aol.com
Subject: Why Yiddish?

It is very difficult for me to understand the dismay that Bruce Mitchel
feels if someone called Yiddish dead. My first language was Yiddish
but as a
secular Jew I have little occasion to use it and my friends who
nostalgically are trying to learn it are ludicrous. Also I don't understand
why Yiddish speaker seem to think that Ashkenazi Jews who speak
Yiddish are
the salt of the earth and if Yiddish dies a great misfortune will occur.
Maybe sad, but in opinion very possible. Every time Jews are allowed
to
breathe they adopt the majority language as the Jew adopted Greek
instead of
Hebrew in the second century BCE.  The Hebrew bible at that time
was
probably translated into Greek so the Jews who could not read
Hebrew could
at least have a translation to read. The conditions allowing Yiddish to
flourish were not admirable and I pray that they may never occur
again. 

Joshua Kleiman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 13 Nov 1998 11:04:04 -0500 (EST)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: a time to grieve or a time to build?

Grieving for Yiddish (or calmly pronouncing its death) afflicted lately
more
than one of our deservingly respected Yiddish scholars. Ruth Wisse
has been
quoted on this screen on several ocasions (06.010, 07.109, 08.075,
etc.).
David Roskies in his article in Forward (July 31, 1998) stopped short of
making the diagnosis for Yiddish, but admitted that he "would much
rather
live - tongue-tied" in the non-Yiddish speaking environment of today
"than
in the imaginary Yiddish-speaking Ashkenaz of yesterday". Janet
Hadda, who
used "a particularly engrossing discussion on Mendele" for the
exposition of
her article in The Jewish Quarterly (Issue 170, Summer 1998),
ventured into
the deeps of classical psychoanalysis in its Freudian flavor to explain
that
the mourning is responsible for the state of "denial" of those who don't
agree that Yiddish is dead. 

As far as I am concerned (Freud or no) Yiddish language is neither
dead nor
dying.  It existed with virtually no secular culture for centuries (until as
late as just two hundred years ago) and if worst come to worst will
continue
in such a "limited" mode for the centuries to come. On the other hand,
Yiddish culture is in bad shape indeed. (Without starting a semiotic
discussion, I'm assuming here that language is a self-sufficient primary
sign system which can exist without what I call _culture_ for the
purpose of
this argument. By _culture_ I mean creative expression in letters and
fine
arts and consumption of the products of such expression, as
distinguished
from the anthropological, sociological, and other definitions of culture).

And those of us who cherish this culture are legitimately worried. And,
of
course, there can be no taboo on discussing this painful matter. So,
what's
wrong with the abovementioned and similar references and why do
they stir
a sharp negative reaction that by many is considered objectionable?

These articles and speeches are addressed to the audience, that at
large
does not really know whether Yiddish is alive or dead and does not
really
care. They are addressed to the audience that faces a severe
(perhaps the
deepest in its modern history) identity crisis.  Congregations approach
100%
atheistic membership. Ethnic identity rapidly succumbs to intermarriage
and
assimilation. Political causes across the spectrum, that once cemented
large
subgroups of this population, all but lost their appeal.  Zionism has
graduated from one of its important phases and does not seem to be
able to
enter another. This list can go on... 

An encouraging bright stroke on the gloomy background is the fact that
this
audience recognized (or at least started the process of recognizing) its
problems. Multiple bureaucracies are redistributing enormous amounts
of
money from one set of largely ridiculous failed projects to another set
of
new projects that already display the early signs of the same
outcomes. And
here is another positive moment: these bureaucracies and their
constituencies are confused and seem to be more open to constructive
suggestions than ever.

The time is ripe for those with strong voices and geniune interest in
preserving Yiddish to come forward and say: Here is the great Yiddish
culture, your unclaimed heritage. Take it! Teach it to your children in
day
schools, in Sunday schools - it may help them understand better who
they are
and where they come from. Learn it yourself, it may serve as your
lucky
ticket into the post-postmodern world, where the diversity is a means
rather
than a goal and where all the distinct pieces are necessary to
complete the
big cultural mosaic.

What do we hear from these strong voices instead? (I do not want to
belittle
what numerous enthusiasts do from their kitchens, but here I mean the
voices
that originate at the lecterns of our finest universities with all the clout
that accompanies them. I also don't mean the monographs that sell in
400
copies as a medium for this communication, I mean the same major
Jewish
newspapers and magazines that don't hesitate to inform the public that
Yiddish is dead.) I can't remember any recent advocacy for practical
steps
of strengthening Yiddish in the printed large circulation media. Am I
missing something? 

Would such appeals on behalf of Yiddish, should they be made, be
percieved
by some as idealistic or quixotic? Probably. Would they prove to be
futile?
We would never know unless we try. 

More than sixty years ago in his bitter essay _On a mazl_ Avrom
Koralnik
attributed Yiddish misfortunes to the lack of Maecenases.  He was not
talking about financial supporters, but rather about readers and
writers,
"who felt that they were doing themselves honor when they
approached" the
language and literature.  At the time the essay was written, it may have
seemed an exaggeration. Today it does not.

Iosif Vaisman

p.s. In this posting I did not attempt to tell anybody what they should
do. 
I just tried to explain that people may blame the messengers not
because
they don't like the messenger or the message, but because they
beleive that
a particualr message-messenger-medium tandem is not appropriate.  -
i.v. 

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 13 Nov 1998 16:43:16 -0500 (EST)
From: harold goodman <hrpharold@erols.com>
Subject: Yiddish in the Haredi community

I have been following the discussion re. Prof. Ruth Wisse and her
comments
on the "death" of Yiddish. A number of correspondants mentioned the
present
situation in the Haredi community (both Hasidic and non-Hasidic)
where
Yiddish is very much a living, vibrant language spoken in the street, at
home, and in the batey medroshim. 

Sitting before me is a copy of Der Yid, one of two weekly papers that
are
read in the Satmar Hasidic community. Since I receive this paper
regularly I
can state that this issue, which is only 104 pages, is one of the
smallest
I've ever received. It's full of community, national, international news,
regular columns on Jewish history, Torah, traditional Jewish texts,
finance,
health, letters to the editor, technology (yes, technology!), hashkofoh,
political analysis, biographies of tsadikim, and serialized books the
latest
of which is "  Der shpion vos hot geratevet amerike". There are also
classified ads (this issue has over 200) and general ads mostly in
Yiddish. 
The address is: Der Yid, 13 Hooper st., Brooklyn, NY 11211. I have no
connection at all with the paper or the Satmar group.

Regardless of your personal opinion of these people (and since most
of you
don't know them personally be careful before you come to any
conclusions) 
they are linguistically living what most of us only discuss on the
Internet
or do as a hobby or nostalgic whim. If Yiddish is to survive into the 21st
century it is people like the readers of this paper and many others like
it
that quietly publish on a regular basis who will keep it alive. Curiously
they have no interest in Yiddish per se. It is their medium of
communication,
not a cause or a subject for study. However, by virtue of the fact that it
has served for so long as the language of the Jewish people and as a
medium
for Torah they consider it a holy language (according to one well
known
Torah personality of years past). 

When I inquired at the National Yiddish Book Center and YIVO not too
long
ago I was told that they didn't know of anyone attempting to
comprehensively
collect and preserve "that type" of Yiddish material. "  That type" of
Yiddish, by the way, consists of many original books, poetry, journals
and a
myriad of audio tapes of often fascinating talks, music, etc. Almost all
of
it is being put out by small, independent publishers in Brooklyn and
other
centers. I have no doubt that it far surpasses in output and
consumption
anything produced by the secular Yiddish camp. 

I write the above because, as you may discern, I strongly believe that
"that
type" of Yiddish, as authentic, alive Yiddish, is just as worthy of
recognition and preservation as "unzerere" Yiddish. 

Hershl Goodman

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 10 Nov 1998 15:33:42 -0500 (EST)
From: poe@ekbos.com (Bob Poe)
Subject: Vus bisti, ketsele, broyges?

This is a different song than the one Abe Chasid was asking about, but
it
seems to be related.  I think I ran across it in a book of Yiddish
folksongs
about 35 years ago, and my memory of it is somewhat garbled.  It
appealed to
me then, and still does.  Maybe some Mendelyaner knows it better and
can
correct my version, or at least render it in a consistent dialect.  It would
be interesting to know whether it is derived from the songs that Andrey
Bredstein and Serge Mitelman contributed, or vice versa, or whether it
is a
distant cousin. 

Bisti mit mir broyges?
Veys ikh nit farvus.
Geyst arim a gantsn tug,
Arupgelozt di nuz.

Efsher vilsti visn
Tsi ikh hob dikh lib.
Lomir zikh ariberfurn
Tsi dem gitn yid.

Tsi dem gitn yid,
A pidien im gebn,
Zol er far indz got betn
Af a lang git lebn.

Zol der giter yid
Indz beyde bentshn
Az mir zoln fun hant an
Lebn shoyn vi mentshn.

Az mir veln furn
Fin dem gitn yid,
Veln mir ariberfurn
In shtetl af dem yarid.

Dort vel ikh dir koyfn
A zeyger mit a keyt,
Un di zolst far mir koyfn
Zeydns af a kleyd.

Bob Poe

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 11 Nov 1998 17:16:47 -0500 (EST)
From: Joel Rubin/Rita Ottens <simontov@compuserve.com>
Subject: Pedonye

Does anybody know the origins and exact meaning of the term
padonye/pedonye?
It must be slang for a kind of seedy night club or bar. 

Thanks,

Joel Rubin

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 11 Nov 1998 23:33:31 -0500 (EST)
From: abramson@uconnvm.uconn.edu (Arthur S. Abramson)
Subject: "Golden heels"

In the course of an interview, a fellow Jewish genealogist in Chicago,
Lisa
Thaler, was told of an ancestor who "wore shoes with golden heels."
She
guesses that this is a literal translation from a Yiddish saying or
expressio and has asked me about it. "I don't know,"said I, and
promised to
try to find out. 
   
Can someone help?

Arn Abramson

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 6 Nov 1998 19:42:50 -0500 (EST)
From: Enele73@aol.com
Subject: Galitzyaner cooking

Rick Turkel's perception of Galitzyaner cooking is different from mine. I
was brought up in a Galitzianer home and my mother never used
tomatoes in
her cooking.  Our next door Italian neighbor did.  My mother did serve
retakh mit tzibeles un shmaltz.  She prepared a lukshen kugel mit zaltz
un
feffer uber di gefilte fish iz geven gemakht mit a bisl tzuker. Oy vey, es
hot mir farglist a shtikele lokshen kigel mit zaltz un feffer un a bisl
reytakh mit tsibeles un shmaltz.  And it's your fault, Rick Turkel, if my
cholesterol soars from the shmaltz and I get heartburn from the retakh. 

And, if you are wondering why I weave in and out of two dialects, its
because I was taught Yidish in a Galatziane heym at first but the
Arbeter
Ring Shulen taught us in the King's Yidish, Lithuanian. 

Anita Schonhaut Appelbaum

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 7 Nov 1998 03:35:56 -0500 (EST)
From: gigi1924@webtv.net (Gail Gaston)
Subject: Introduction

I am in completely new territory here and feeling a bit overwhelmed by
the
variety and content of postings to Mendele. After my first visit, I was
moved to make some comments, but in my naivete and inexperience in
this
media I sent E-mails to the writers rather than posting my remarks to
everyone in general. 
      
I am not a Yiddish scholar; the closest I ever came to learning the
language
was when my zaide sat down with the Jewish Forward and pointed to
the all
the letters trying to teach me alef, beys...  I was not raised in a home
where Yiddish was spoken, nor where most Jewish holidays were
observed. 
What I did learn came from my grandparents informally.  When we
visited them
often I watched and listened and absorbed all the rituals and Yiddish
expressions.  It was all stored in my mind and heart; the plucking of the
chickens for Shabbos dinner, the aroma of fish being "gefulted", the
lighting of the candles on Friday nights, the visits to the synagogue on
Yom Kippur to hear the ram's horn, my zaide reclining among his
pillows at
our Pesach seder, and so much more. 
    
For more than fifty years I heard no Yiddish But it tugs at my heart I
even
love to hear English spoken with a Yiddish accent, it reminds me of
who I
am.  I found a wonderful recording in my local library called "The
Yiddish
Dream".  It contains many old favorite Yiddish folk songs.  (By the way,
if
you have not heard Mandy Patinkin's CD "Mamaloshen", I recommend
it.) 

I have spent the last two nights scrolling back and reading all of your
postings for the last two months.  I tried to mouth the Yiddish words
and
struggled to comprehend their meanings, and appreciated the English
translations.  I must be honest and say that the scholastic discussions
were
really over my head.  Some of you might turn away when I say that the
erudite comments relating to grammar, syntax, rhyming in poetry, etc.
were
more than I bargained for. My connection to Yiddish is an emotional
one, but
I want to hold fast to that connection. 
  
Yiddish is not irrelevant.  It may be many things today, neglected,
hidden,
forgotten by many, but irrelevant?  NO!  It lives in the hearts of those
who
love it and struggle to keep it alive.

To those of you who referred to Camp (the way I heard it was
Nishgedayget) 
and Camp Kinderland.  I couldn't believe my eyes when I saw that.  I
attended Camp Kinderland when I was about ten or so.  Aside from all
the
usual fun camp activities, I remember we started every morning around
the
Soviet Union flag and sang "Arise, ye workers......"!  I didn't know the
words, but we had to sing it before we had breakfast, so I learned fast.
  
Should I apologize for the length of this letter?  If you were bored, I
suppose you skipped over it and went to the next posting.  But I had to
do
this; so much feeling welled up in me as I read what each of you has
written, that I had to "let it all hang out" (is there a Yiddish expression
for that). 
          
A new friend in Yiddishkeit, I hope,
                            
Gail Gaston
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.085

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



