
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.303
January 31, 1995

1) Galitsianer II (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 29 Oct 92 12:47:36 IST
From: Leonard Prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: Galitsianer

To give an adequate account of the Galician share in the achievment of
which Mendelsohn speaks would fill many lengthy monographs.  By
sketching the lives and accomplishments of three modern, and in certain
respects representative, Galician Jews -- Mordecai Gebirtig, Ignacy
Schiper and Dov Sadan -- I may be able to evoke at least the outlines
of a living collective portrait. (22)

Mordecai Gebirtig

Mordecai Gebirtig (1877-1942) was born in Krakow and lived in its Jewish
working-class quarter all his life, one which was ended by a Nazi bullet
in the Krakow ghetto on the infamous "Bloody Thursday" of June 4th, 1942.
He is the preeminent "folk" artist in Yiddish literature and song, two
realms which are united in his simple yet masterly lyrics, for most of
which he himself composed the score.  In characterizing him as a "folk"
poet-musician, no condescension is intended, but rather acknowledgement
of his universal appeal and of the origins and the course of growth of
his art.  He was self-taught in music, played the shepherd's pipe well,
and tapped out tunes on the piano with one finger.  He earned his
livelihood as a furniture worker; music and theater were avocations.
From 1906 he was a member of the Jewish Amateur Troupe in Krakow.  He
also wrote songs and theater reviews for _Der sotsial-demokrat_, the
Yiddish organ of the Jewish Social-Democratic Party, to which he
belonged.  This party was in effect the Galician Bund, which after World
War I fused with the Polish Bund to become the great Yiddishist party of
the Polish Jewish proletariat, whose banner called for Jewish cultural
autonomy in a democratic and socialist Poland.  This movement was
ultimately more effective in the realm of culture than in that of
politics.  The Jewish workers' movement from its beginnings at the end of
the nineteenth century became the cradle of numerous amateur theater
groups, choirs, lending libraries, discussion groups, and periodicals.

It was in such an environment that Gebirtig developed, encouraged by
such professional writers and Yiddishist culural activists as Avrom
Reyzn, who for a time lived and published a journal in Krakow.  His
talent was his own, but he took the language, themes, types, tone and
timbre of his art from his surroundings, in some measure continuing the
musical tradition of the popular Galician cabaret entertainers known as
the Broder Singers, who in turn were beholden to the yet older and still
vital tradition of the batkhn's (wedding jester's) improvisatory art.

Gebirtig served for five years in the Austro-Hungarian army and it was
only in 1920, under the second Polish Republic, that he published his
first collection of songs, significantly entitled Folkstimlekh ('of the
folk').  His songs spread quickly even before they were published, and
many people regarded them as folksongs whose author or authors were
anonymous.  Adopted by leading Yiddish players such as Molly Picon,
Gebirtig's songs became staples of numerous regular as well as improvised
theatrical productions wherever Yiddish theatre was performed.  It is not
an exaggeration to say that Gebirtig's songs were sung and lovingly sung
the world over.

Gebirtig's art appears to have won full recognition in the new Poland.
This is gratifying, yet it is regrettable that too often his repertoire
is rendered in a sentimental, even a saccharine manner. (22a)   We need
to remember that Gebirtig is most famous for his song "Undzer shtetl
brent," which was written as early as 1938 following a pogrom in Pszytyk
and which was later adopted by the Jewish youth of Krakow and others as a
battlesong against the Nazis.  In his song "S'tut vey" ('It Hurts'),
Gebirtig is shattered by the absence of solidarity of all Polish citizens
against the Nazi invaders.  Dated Krakow February 1940, it is a song
directed against those Poles who laughed when German soldiers humiliated
and tortured old Jews in the streets of Krakow.  "Un zey! / Vis zaynen
itst vi mir / Geblibn on a land. / Vos filn itst vi mir / Dem vildn
soynes hand, / Lakhn, freyen zikh un lakhn / In aza moment, Ven poyln's
shtolts un koved / Vert azoy geshendt. / Ven poylns vaysn odler / Valgert
zikh af der erd.... / Iz dos nisht a shand / An eybiker far zey? ('And it
is they! / Who like us / Have lost a country,/ Who like us now feel / The
savage enemy's strokes. / They laugh, they make merry and laugh / At this
hour, / When Poland's pride and honor / Are being raped, / When Poland's
White Eagle / Lies in the dirt.... / Is this not / To their eternal
shame?') (23)  Gebirtig has often been called "der zinger fun der
umgekumener yidisher mase in poyln" ('the singer of the murdered Jewish
masses of Poland'.  Gebirtig's song "It Hurts" expresses what most Jews
have always felt and what courageous Poles like Jan Blonski have clearly
said on this painful subject: the Poles could not have saved the Jews
from their fate and are not responsible for that fate, but they could
certainly have shown more compassion to the Jews in their agony. (24)

Ignacy Schiper

Ignacy Schiper (or Schipper) was born Yitskhok Shiper in 1884, but
changed his name when, as with so many young Jews of his day and place,
Polish became his principal language and culture.  A born historian, he
published an essay on the pre-eighteenth century history of the Jews of
Tarnow (Yiddish: Torne), his place of birth, before he was twenty (25);
he was still doing original historical work on the eve of his heroic
death in Majdanek in 1943. A sketch of the life and career of a man with
as many interests as Schiper had will be fragmentary.  He was an
attorney, one of the chief leaders of the Zionist movement in Poland, for
many years as a labor Zionist and later as a general Zionist,
representing that party in the Polish Sejm.  He pioneered in several
historical fields -- the economic history of Polish Jewry (26) and the
history of the Yiddish theater, to name but two.  He was an avid local
historian and a collector and student of Jewish folklore, an enthusiast
and critic of Yiddish theater, a lover and a scholar of Yiddish and its
literature, an historian of Polish chasidism, a lecturer, educator,
essayist, journalist. Nor does this exhaust the list of his activities.

Influenced at school by the social and national ideals of the Polish
neoromantics, Schiper was early won to Jewish nationalism.  This could
then take two different forms, that of the autonomists who saw their
future in a pluralistic Poland and that of the Zionists, who banked on an
independent Jewish homeland in its own territory.  Though a lifelong
Zionist, Schiper was not of the ordinary cut: he defended Yiddishist
positions against both the Hebraists and the Polonizers. In this
reflection of intellectual independence, one glimpses Schiper's profound
sense of identity with "amkho," the ordinary, everyday simple Jewish man
and woman -- an attitude one would expect in a Gebirtig, but not in a
Polonized attorney with a Dr. title before his name.

Schiper worked actively for the Yiddish Scientific Institute (YIVO) and
as a leading member of its Historical Commission (which issued the
impressive series _Historishe shriftn fun yivo_) was often consulted.  In
a letter to his fellow Commission member, the historian, Elias
Tchertikower, Schiper wrote: "I subscribe to writing history insofar as
it relates to present-day problems.  I feel that we should make a
conscious effort to adhere to this principle, namely of supporting and
organizing only those studies that have a direct or indirect bearing on
vibrant Jewish life and can effect to some extent the deeper
comprehension of present-day problems.  With this viewpoint in mind, I
must first form an image of the dynamic of the present; that is, in which
the activity of a modern Jewish person reveals itself.  I see this
activity in the following areas: the question of migration, cultural
universalism, that is, the aspiration to commingle specific cultural
values with universal cultural aspirations.  From this it follows that
our historical research encompasses the following areas: history of
Jewish migration, economic history (particularly the study of class
differentiation of Jews, historical causes of Jewish mass poverty in
Eastern Europe, the rise of class organizations, namely guilds,
_kehillot_ as organs of economic struggle, modern proletarian
organizations, artisan unions, merchants' associations, etc.), historical
statistics, the history of Jewish autonomous aspirations, Jews as
diplomats and members of legislatures, the role of Jews as intermediaries
in transplanting the accomplishments of Oriental culture to Europe,
European cultural achievements in Jewish culture, particularly in the
culture of the Jewish common man, and the like."  (27)  In this
credo-like statement we see the integral nature of Schiper's commitment
to historical research; we also see his characteristic concern for the
folk, the common people, a feeling devoid of paternalism or
condescension.  We know that Schiper's mother was a baker's daughter and
his middle-class father upon marriage is said to have socialized in his
wife's family's circles rather than his own parents'.  The Yiddish that
Schiper heard from childhood was the authentic vernacular which he was to
champion all his life, even after he learned to move with ease socially
and professionally in Polish and German.  There are few better examples
than Schiper of a young Jew who passed through the typical stages of
acculturation and secularization without abandoning his earliest
heritage, the Judaic lore of the kheyder, and the folk tongue. (28)

Schiper was ideologically committed to the view, shared by Bundists and
Folkists, that Yiddish was a value in itself in addition to being a
barrier to assimilation and loss of group selfhood.  His interest in and
love of folklore flowed from his nationalism and from the belief that the
community as a whole is creative and that its indigenous traditons are
valuable.  His pioneering history of the Yiddish theater met with a good
deal of criticism, but -- as Bar-Ilan University's issuing a facsimile of
the work this year shows -- it remains a book of great originality, one
still worth consulting for the breadth and scope of its treatment.
Schiper was especially fond of the theater because it was a popular art
and a school for educating the people's taste.  In his autobiographical
_Fragmentn fun mayn lebn_ (Buenos-Aires, 1951), the actor and director,
Zigmund Turkov, tells us that when Schiper lived in Warsaw he attended
all opening nights of the Warsaw Yiddish theater, enjoyed drinking and
chatting with the actors in their favorite cafe after the performance,
was highly informed regarding the technical and artistic dimensions of
theater and was much consulted by actors and, especially, directors.  He
was an acknowledged authority on the Purim shpil.

Schiper the historian was sharply aware of the realia of daily life.  In
his _Kultur-geshikhte fun yidn beysn mitlalter_ (Warsaw, 1926), sketches
of Jews on stained glass windows of a fourteenth-century church,
descriptions of architectural details of medieval synagogues -- all are
grist for his fertile historical imagination which builds larger
constructs from isolated fragments.

Schiper found strength in his work to the last, writing a history of
Chasidism in Central Poland while in a death camp; he died in Maidanek.
Fortunately, a young Polish student of Hebrew at the University of
Warsaw, Zbigniew Targielski discovered, identified and typed two ms.
notebooks of this book -- a third was apparently lost. The work,
containing six chapters, was recently published. Professor Khone Shmeruk
points out that in the polemical fourth chapter Schiper challenges the
widely accepted view that chasidism represented a continuation of the
commoners' struggle against their exploiters, the tsadik serving as the
people's tribune, the defender of the downtrodden.  Schiper, the pioneer
of the economic and social history of the Jews, insists that chasidism in
central Poland transcended class and enbraced rich and poor alike.
Social activist though he was, he refused to believe in a utopian
phenomenon in the total absense of historical evidence to support it.
(29)  In his second chapter, Schiper maintains that the principal leaders
and propagators of chasidism in Poland in the second half of the 18th
century were either from Galicia or under Galician influence, mainly that
of R. Elimeylekh of Lezansk (or Lezajsk; Yiddish: Lizhensk). The latter's
teachings regarding the tsadik swept Poland.  Of particular interest is
Schiper's view that the character of Polish chasidism was not determined
by doctrinal divisions, but by such practices as healing the sick,
absolving sins, praying with zeal, worshiping with joy, and scorning
Talmud study (30). Most important were the rebes themselves, many of them
highly charismatic, drawing thousands to their respective courts where a
deep and often lifelong bond developed between rebe and follower. (31)
Here again the social and economic historian was able to see that
thaumaturgy is above class.  In the third chapter Schiper showed that
Yiddish popular literature helped spread chasidism; he also showed that
Polish chasidism borrowed from mystical sources such notions as 'love of
the Land of Israel', 'settling in the Land of Israel', and 'helping the
Jewish settlement in the Holy Land'.  Perhaps only an historian who was
also a Yiddishist and a General Zionist could have seen so clearly that
early Polish chasidism was nationalist, supra-class and Zion-oriented.

Fate not only robbed Schiper of realizing a dream of settling in the Land
of Israel, but from becoming the Jewish homeland's first professor of
Yiddish, an honor which was to fall to Dov Sadan, the third and last of
the Galician-Jewish figures I will talk about. .co off;.sk 1 .ce on;.sk 1
.bd Dov Sadan .ce off;.sk 1 .co on;.sk 1 Though he died only a few years
ago, Dov Sadan is already a legend.  Indeed for many he was a legend even
while he lived.  In eulogizing him, the great Israeli Vilna-born Yiddish
poet Avrom Sutskever said what everyone thought: "Er iz geven an
umfarglaykhlekher afile tsvishn umfarglaykhlekhe."  ('He was incomparable
even among incomparable persons.' (32)

Dov Sadan was born Berl Shtok-Shperber in Brody in 1902.  During World
War I he moved with his family to Lwow, where he attended the Polish
gymnasium.  The teachers who influenced him toward history and literary
research included the distinguished Jewish historian, Maier Balaban and
the Poles, Tadeusz Fini and T.A. Modalski, both of whom later became
professors. Though he was expelled from the gymnasium for giving Hebrew
rather than Polish as his mother tongue, and for disobeying the rules
regarding writing for the press, his life and work, like Schiper's, was
indelibly shaped by his Polish gymnasium experience in Brody and Lwow.
Yoysef Tenenboym's testimony supports the claim of Mendelsohn and others
that Polish nationalism provided a model for Jewish nationalism,
localizing this process in the Polish gymnasium: "...khotsh mir zenen
geven yunge kinder, hobn mir zikh shoyn oysgelernt, az men tor zikh nisht
lozn shpayen in der kashe oder lozn baleydikn undzer ume.  Di profesorn
un di kristlekhe studentn hobn zikh ongehoybn tsutsugevoynen tsum nayem
ton fun di yidishe studentn.  Ot azoy hot zikh pavolye oysgebildet a min
'modus vivendi'.  Vos mer mir zenen ufgevaksen, alts mer zenen mir gevorn
dreyster in undzer natsionaler haltung.  Di poylishe poetn: Mitskevitsh,
Krashinski, un epes veyniker, Slovatski, hobn geshept fun yidishn tanach
zeyere inspiratsyes far zeyere poylishe meshikhes ideen.  Un mir, di
yungvarg hobn tsurikgeshept fun di verk fun ot di poylishe romantiker dem
groysn entuziazm un di brenendike hofenung fun shives yisroel.  Zeyere
natsionale yontoyvim, zeyere heldn hobn mir fartaytsht af undzere eygene
natsionale figurn un altsding, vos iz geven sheyn un ideal in der
poylisher geshikhte, hot bakumen a yidishe tsure in undzer benkenish nokh
der geule."  ('Though we were only youngsters, we had already learned
that we must not allow ourselves to be humiliated or our people to be
insulted.  The teachers and students began to accustom themselves to the
new tone of the Jewish students.  Thus there gradually grew up a 'modus
vivendi'.  As we grew older we became more confident in our nationalist
bearing.  The Polish poets Mickiewicz, Kraszinski, and to a lesser
extent, Slowacki, drew their inspiration for their Polish messianic ideas
from the Jewish Bible. And we youngsters in turn drew from the Polish
romantics the great zeal and burning hope of the Return to Zion.  We
translated their national holidays and heroes into our own national
figures and everything that was beautiful and idealistic in Polish
history assumed a Jewish form in our yearning for Redemption.') (33)  To
understand the phenomenon of Dov Sadan one must also take into account
the vital role of the Zionist youth movements as auxiliary educational
institutions. These youth movements became powerful vehicles for
secularization, Polonization, modernization, politicization, and
productivization -- a major source for the dynamism noted by several
historians of interwar Poland.  Yoysef Tenenboym writes:  "Di gimnazye iz
geven undzer shule, ober undzer emeser besmedresh, undzer kloyz un undzer
dertsiung iz geven undzer eygene yugnt-organizatsye...."  ('The gymnasium
was our school, but our true study-house and schooling were our
youth-organization') (34)  Youth-movement members studied Hebrew,
Palestinography, Jewish history and art, heard lectures and held
discussions.  They awaited weekends as religious Jews did the Sabbath.
In many places these activities were forbidden to high school students,
which added spice to them.

Educated in Polish, German, Hebrew and Yiddish, Sadan wrote Polish poetry
in his youth, periodically read and wrote Polish throughout his life, and
until his very last days enjoyed speaking Polish to friends.  He often
met with Anna Dresner, the translator of Sholem Aleichem in Polish, for
chats in Polish -- a kind of recreation for both of them.  Anna Dresner
told me several years before her death, when Sadan was already over
eighty, that his Polish was perfect.  This life-long retention of his
native Polish after leaving Poland at age 23 is surely significant in one
who was a stylistic virtuoso in several languages.  He has been called
"one of the great masters of modern Hebrew prose" and is noted, too, for
his original Yiddish style.  He himself regarded his letter-writing -- he
estimated that he wrote a quarter of a million letters in his lifetime --
as the crown of his literary production.  This in itself underlines the
unity of his writing and his life.  Yet aside from his letters, the list
of his publications is quite astounding: three thousand items, including
over fifty books.

Without aspiring to such a position and with virtually no formal
schooling beyond the Polish gymnasium which he never completed, Sadan
became the first incumbent of the chair in Yiddish at the Hebrew
University, the first such chair in the State of Israel. At his
inauguration he told his audience: "Permit me to begin with a word of
thanks for the opportunity now being given me in the second half of my
life to devote myself to learning.... Not that I have the slightest
regret regarding the half that is over. I don't intend to burden you with
my biography, but permit me to say that my earliest life goal was not
realized.  By background and education I was destined to become an
enlightened rabbi and a modern Judaic scholar.  I do not regret that my
path went in another direction. Just as I am not sorry that my struggle
for Zionism and Hebrew got me expelled from my Polish gymnasium, so am I
not sorry for having been caught up in the chaluts movement, for having
been one of the doers and builders, for having come to this land at a
young age borne on the waves of this movement, which I served first in
the kibuts and later for many years on the staff of the workers'
federation daily, work which I never regarded as a vocation but as an
avocation.  But even afterwards, when my literary and scholarly work
began to take wing, I felt that early desire for learning and wondered if
the time would ever come when I would be able to devote myself
exclusively to scholarship and writing." (35)

The thrust of Sadan's creativity in the second half of his life will take
scholars years to digest.  His works in the field of Jewish folklore
alone -- in which he often compared Polish analogues and sources -- cover
a huge area of subjects, including jokes, idioms, proverbs, and beliefs.
His studies on Agnon and Bialik are among the most profound in Hebrew
criticism.  He is a consummate translator and was the first to translate
Kafka into Hebrew.  In his varied career Sadan also served as a member of
the Israeli Keneset, representing the Labour Party, but he resigned
before his full term expired.  He did not feel he could be as effective
in politics as he could be as teacher and writer.  He did not err in this
judgement and one can readily assess how influential Sadan was in these
central roles.  More than any other person, Sadan championed the view
that modern Jewish literature was "one multi-faceted unified body in a
variety of languages," a view which had a particularly beneficial effect
on the status of Yiddish.  In addition to the prestige he gave to Yiddish
by returning to write in that language after a hiatus of thirty years,
Sadan educated a generation of first-rate Yiddish research scholars which
has helped place Yiddish scholarship on the highest level. (36)

Gebirtig, Schiper and Sadan were all men of talent and dedication who
gave of themselves freely in the creative resistance which defined
Galician-Jewish life between the two world wars.  To fathom the richness
of their lives and work -- so marvelously unified -- is to begin to
glimpse the remarkable community that Galician Jewry was.

Leonard Prager
Haifa
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.303

