
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.078
August 13, 1993

1) More on semiotica (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Aug 12 16:35:10 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: more on semiotica

      First of all, thank you all for your warm support, public and
private.  I am also glad that no one is arguing that the issues I
discussed are out of bounds for Mendele.  It feels like its a quiet
summer and all those who would probably come out and argue with me
lign oysgeshprayt baym yam un lebn a tog away from the computers.  I
also want to explain that I pay for my postings (not for receiving)
and in my very busy summer of preparing for a bar-mitsva to be held
at home, it is easier and cheaper for me to batch my responses
instead of responding individually.   So my responses turn out to be
periodic and longer.

--To Meylekh,

      You are right.  I don't know how the halakhic issue of using
Christmas decoration on a sukkah was gepasknt and would love to hear
the argumentations, if I only knew/or had time to find them. If you
ever come across any info on this, please let me know.  But it's
obvious that it is `muter', otherwise, you wouldn't find them being
used.  The new thing I discovered last week on my visit to the Paper
Maven store on Coney Island Ave. is that they, at least, carry 3
imported lines of these products and only one of the 3 now has a
symbolic Christmas green and red holly decoration, but no "For
Christmas" text on them.  The other 2 product lines are new and
sound Jewish (one is "Devra Importers").

--To Lorinda,

      Thank you so much for offering such a similar analogy.  It's
exactly the same conflict.  I personally don't associate the
category of wreaths with Jesus's crown of thorns for many reasons.
For me they are also not particularly Christian (perhaps Greek?)
partly because I have my own Jewish associations with wreaths.  As a
child in Israel, we girls used to make ourselves a head wreath out
of daisies and on Shavues, we children wore head wreaths in all
kinds of school ceremonies.  Several Yiddish songs speak of a
"blumenkrants", but I don't really know how such wreaths were used
in Eastern Europe.  I am sure if we looked we would also find many
ancient Jewish uses of wreaths.  What I think marks the wreaths we
are uncomfortable with are those that are just simply hung on a door
or a wall--used in the particular way that Christians use them for
Christmas.  I also had no idea that the mylar papercuts are also
popular in Israel, --probably the influence of American Jews.   For
more on this, see below.

--To Ellen,

      Thank you very much for your note.  Since posting my little
essay on cultural borrowing, I have been thinking a lot about
exactly this emotion you described in seeing the poinsettas in
Israel, --this feeling of being jarred by what we are experiencing
as misappropriation of symbolic values.  I haven't studied it in
depth, but it's fascinating to think about both personally and
professionally.  Maybe some others will write more about it. I'd
just like to make three points.  In America, poinsettas are endowed
with the semiotics of Christmas, but YOU were not the one who
endowed poinsettas with the semiotics of Christmas.  American
culture and business endowed poinsettas with Christian symbolism.
(Are they now or were they ever traditionally used in Europe too for
such occasions?) There is nothing Christian or ethnic about wreaths,
poinsettas, papercuts, or stringed lights at this point in history.
Their associations with Christmas is not very old and still regional
at best. It is just that we Americans are constantly bombarded with
all kinds idealized, secularized and deracinated images of
Christmas, a Christmas devoided of dogma, and anesthesizing in its
pleasantness and beauty. This is all the product of the
commercialization of Christmas in America, a state of mind that can
be attained by procuring such products as bushels of poinsettas,
lovely wreaths, spiced eggnog, beautiful colorful lights, etc. and
you never have to get into the issue of is Jesus your saviour or
not.

Where does that leave Jews?  It leaves them safe from overzealous
Christians, but in psychic limbo because that image of beautiful
peacefulness is both so inviting to so many of us (as we see from
the high rate of intermarriage and assimilation) and so easily
acquireable at your local stores.  So much creative artistry has
gone into the creation of the secularized Christmas that it invites
you in in so many ways.  So some of us, e.g., Lorinda Weinstock and
I, vis- a-vis wreaths, stand there not knowing whether to step into
that semiotic realm or not.

How do you get the aesthetics out of wreath and avoid the Christian
part?  Perhaps you could cut it up when you live in Israel, but its
a bit harder to do it in cosmopolitan America, unless you buy into
this secularized world. Re poinsettas:  If the Israelis are aware of
this association, they may, because of their own important
flower-importing industry, choose to ignore this symbolism and use
such flora in any way they see fit.  It may also be possible that
the poinsettas were part of a commercial effort there for the
benefit of the Christian tourists who come at that time of year.
Were these poinsettas planted by Israelis for native aesthetic
consumption?  Or else, it may be Christian, shmishtian, say the
powers that be, these very showy plants grow well in Israel and
poinsettas are a good practical aesthetic solution for all the
tourists who come during school breaks in December and January.

Lastly, I will tell you what I am doing with all this wreath,
poinsetta, etc. analysis: I am suggesting that studying how
semiotica is used and negotiated can be as fertile a territory as
the sociolinguistic study of vocalic height in analyzing levels of
group identity, ritual observance, social structures, ethnic
marginality, etc. --things that you as a linguist know much about.

--To Alef Shtumer,

      Wait for Purim!  We can have several issues for that occasion,
anisht vet men take kenen zogn "a gants yor shiker un Purim
nikhter?" Internet has been described as a global faculty lounge
discussion, and I'm sure when you conversed in faculty lounges, you
appreciated connecting the person with the idea.  That is a
different and sometimes a more meaningful experience than just
reading someone's ideas.  In this faceless medium, masks can become
on many levels meaningless and annoying.  If we are going to attain
here some level of that lounge discourse, I, for one, would want it
nisht farmaskirt.  But we'll all wait for a fun Purim!

As for a writer pseudonymically writing his own good reviews, all I
can say is it's sometimes pathetic, sometimes in the end justified
(if no one is taking notice of your wonderful work), not uncommon,
and richly varied in all its manifestations.  If Wexler had written
a pseudonymic self-promoting review of the type you are describing,
I would have thought it sad, deceitful, etc., but I would never have
spoken up about it publically.  What so unnerved me about Wexler's
type of self-promoting review is that he totally and ruthlessly
buried other innocent people just to get attention for himself, nokh
dertsu not in some esoteric journal, but in what is for me
academically, sacred territory, namely, the journal Language.
Secondly, I see the lack of condemnation of Wexler as most curious.
I have heard very little talk and seen nothing written about it
anywhere but in the journals already mentioned.  It was just buried
and and hoped to be forgotten.  My husband, a film director ("Image
Before My Eyes", "Partisans of Vilna", etc.) and a former linguist,
was also surprised that Wexler was not fired for such a "shpitsl".

--Tsu Danil,

      In di ale yorn vos ikh ken dikh, gedenk ikh nisht afile eyn
mol redn english tsu dir un es filt zikh take modne dos do tsu ton.
Vel ikh tipirn oyf transliteratsye azoy lang vi ikh ken oysshteyn,
un vi lang der zeyger vet mikh lozn.  (Ikh hof nor az dovid braun
vet zikh nisht filn kegrivdet vos ikh hob zikh nisht azoy bamit far
im.)

Afile az du host hanoye gehat fun mayn kleynem essey do, meyn ikh az
du host es emes nisht farshtanen.  S'iz nisht emes az "vos veyniker
men iz tif durkhgevept mit yidishe religye un ritualn, alts mer
shtaygt di nervezkayt az andere veln meynen az men borgt/nutst
khristlekhe traditsyes."   S'iz lav davke punkt farkert.  Di
nervezkayt bavayst zikh nor ven men identifitsirt zikh shtark mit
yidishkayt un ire verdn; nor demolt ken men zikh filn umbakvem ven
men zet "poinsettas" in Yisroel, nitl likht oder nitl dekoratsyes
oyf a sukke, oder a tmimesdikn krantz gemakht fun troybn vaynshtok.
Oyb men volt nisht shtark gehaltn fun yidishe vertn, volt men zikh
gelozt koyfn oder nutsn di khfeytsim (artifacts).  Demolt volt men
zikh gelozt farkhapn in di sheynkeyt fun a produkt.  Vos volt dir
geshtanen in veg?  Es volt in gantsn nisht geven keyn inyen.  Ven
Lorinda Weinstock shraybt, "So, even though a grapevine is a
wonderful symbol for most of the Jewish holidays; in the shape of a
wreath I find it too potently Christian" iz es klor as zi iz nisht
emes asimilirt anisht volt zi nisht dershmekt un zikh nisht
dershrokn fun der makht fun dem simbol.

Vegn dem inyen zelbst-bavustzinikayt gey ikh shoyn shraybn oyf
english vayl ikh makh do azoy fil toesn in transkibirn mayn yidish,
un far a Yivonitse vi ikh, ken ikh nisht lozn azoy fil
nisht-korigirte toesn shteyn un s'iz shoyn tsu shpet tsu ton
forzikhtikerheyt.  Itst darf ikh baytn dos rendl un zikh
iberorientirn tsu trakhtn oyf english, iz mir shoyn shver.

>I believe it's also related to how comfortable one is displaying one's
>own observances/traditions without feeling self-conscious.

      The source of the Jewish self-consciousness in using objects
with known Christian symbolic value in an open society lies not in
the discomfort in displaying one's own observances/traditions.  I
don't personally know the other people who posted here about this
issue, but it surely doesn't sound like any of us are uncomfortable
with displaying our Jewish "observances".  You tend to find few such
people on Mendele anyway.  The issue is something completely
different.

All members of groups that compose a multi-ethnic society must
continuously negotiate cultural and semiotic boundaries.  When a
strongly identified Jew decides to live in the open, multicltural
part of American society as opposed to the distinctly orthodox or
khasidic world, she/he accepts much of that society's values.

But what one finds is the more one identifies Jewishly, the more
selective and careful that person is about avoiding the religious
Christian elements even after those elements have been secularized,
humanized-- suggesting a spirit of universal inclusivity.  Such
people as I, or Lorinda Weinstock, or Ellen Prince or Naomi Cohen
know not to buy or accept this new (commercial) sanitized
Christianity in this mixed society where we spend a lot of our
cultural time.

I think that the source of the anxiety is the continuous care needed
to avoid getting too close to that non-Jewish religious dimension.
We set boundaries about our selves when we live in that environment.
Unlike you, I for one, as I stated, came out of the frum Yeshiva
world and decided I no longer wanted to live there.  I deliberately
live in a non-Jewish neighborhood un fir a Yidish hoyz dortn.  You,
as bal-tshuveh, seem to have come into the frum community accepting
and buying all the traditional forms wholesale.  And when you know
that the Jewish G & G Sons sells these items for the frum market as
sukkah decorations, you automatically accept the premise and buy it,
un du varfst zikh arayn in dem layb un lebn --probably the way frum
people think Jews living outside of such neighborhoods do vis-a-vis
the rest of the world.

But when you look closely, it isn't so, and for most Jews, has never
been so. I have been fortunate in that I have spent a lot of time in
my life getting to know  and observing a very wide range of Jews and
Jewish communities and I can tell you that all Jews get nervous
about crossing inter- and intra-cultural boundaries. Everyone gets
nervous.  They just get nervous about different things.  That
khasidic lady buying a product marked "For Christmas" doesn't get
nervous about one or two peices of questionable semiotica because
she has both immersed and surrounded herself fun ale zaytn with
every Jewish value and symbol.

That's what I meant by making the boundaries between the Jewish and
the "goish" world water-tight.   I may have set myself up as a foil
vis-a vis the khasidic lady and called myself an assimilated Jew in
my posting to Dovid Braun in order to dramatize my point, but I
don't know of anyone who would describe me as an assimilated Jew.
The same can probably be said of the other contributors on this
issue, I would guess.

      I must tell you one ancedote, again from the realm of the
personal and then I got to go.  My very cosmopolitan and brilliant
son was switched to a modern orthodox Hebrew Day School  (Yeshivah
of Flatbush) two years ago and of course found the kids very
provincial and small-minded.  He also had a problem getting accepted
by them.  Since he is a very good kid with a wonderful sense of
humor, he slowly won a nice loyal chevre in his grade, but he still
has terrible problems with one clique and a few months ago he
finally related to me what it's all about.

That group of kids resent him because he seems to cross both the
orthodox and the secular world with great aplomb; and though he
never seems to suck up to any of the teachers, he still has all of
their admiration for his great brilliance and multiple talents.
(Remember, in this frum world, brilliance has the highest currency,
and "coolness" the lowest.)  They hate him because he seems to
negotiate so easily that `tumedik', horrific open society without
falling off into the tumedike abyss and can still so ably argue
gemore when he wants to. He is "cool" and worldly with a father who
is so celebrated in that goyish world, while remaining so Jewish and
quite observant at the same time.

Seeing such a combination at once when all messages to those very
frum kids at the school tell them that these 2 worlds can not be
juggled is very disconcerting to them.  And they finally and
explicitly let him know it. Iz makh es nisht azoy avek mit der hant
az ale umbakvemlikhkaytn kumen fun zikh filn nit bakvem mit
yidishkayt oder yidishe minhogim.

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky                  Reyzl@mcimail.com

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.078

