
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.007
June 2, 1998

1) Tribute to Mordechai Strigler in the US Senate (Iosif Vaisman)
2) Mordechai Strigler (Percy Mett)
3) Veb-verterbikher/ On-line dictionaries (Allen Hillel Merkrebs)
4) Vilde chaya (Aviva Starkman)
5) vilde chaye (Eve Edelman Russ)
6) vilde chaya (harvey roy greenberg)
7) Schlemiel (Nina Warnke)
8) Schlemiel (Martin Davis)
9) Schlemiel (Joachim Neugroschel)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 May 1998 16:25:26 -0400 (EDT)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: Tribute to Mordechai Strigler in the US Senate

Archive-Name: gov/us/fed/congress/record/1998/may/21/1998CRS5347A
[Congressional Record: May 21, 1998 (Senate)]
[Page S5347-S5348]
>From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:cr21my98-177]

                           MORDECHAI STRIGLER

<bullet> Mr. MOYNIHAN. Mr. President, today is a bittersweet day at the
Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City where the annual
commencement ceremony will include an unprecedented presentation of a
posthumous honorary doctorate to Mordechai Strigler, the talented
editor of the Yiddish Forward who died last week at the age of 76.
  I rose almost a year ago today to share with the Senate the news of
the Forward's centenary. This remarkable newspaper, which once helped
hundreds of thousands of new immigrants learn about their new homeland,
now prints Yiddish, Russian and English weekly editions. The Yiddish
edition has gone from a daily press run of 250,000 copies to a weekly
run of 10,000, but has retained much of the literary excellence and
social conscience that has so characterized the Forward during its
storied history.
  Mordechai Strigler was born in 1921 in Zamosc, Poland, and was sent
to study in a yeshiva at age 11. In 1937 he began work as a rabbi and
teacher in Warsaw.
  When the Germans occupied Poland in 1939, he tried to escape to
Russia, but was caught at the border. He spent

[[Page S5348]]

a few months at the Zamosc ghetto with his parents and then five years
in several concentration camps. In Buchenwald, he was a member of the
Resistance and served as a covert teacher for the children incarcerated
there. He was liberated on April 11, 1945.
  After the war, he began writing furiously and prolifically for the
next 53 years until his death. He chronicled the slave-labor camps and
death factories in a six-volume Yiddish series called ``Oysgebrente
Likht'', which means ``Extinguished Candles''.
  In 1955, Strigler published two volumes called ``Arm in Arm with the
Wind,'' a historical novel about Jewish life in Poland in the 17th and
18th centuries.
  His newspaper career began in Warsaw just before the war and
flourished in Paris after the war. In France, he served as editor of
Unzer Vort (Our world), a Yiddish daily.
  While in New York, he was offered the editorship of the Kemfer, a
position he held until 1995. He published such classic Yiddish writers
as Abraham Reizen, H. Leivik, Chaim Grade, and Jacob Glatstein.
  In 1978, Strigler was awarded the Itzak Manger Prize in Jewish
Literature, one of the most distinguished prizes in the field.
  He became editor of the Yiddish Forward in 1987, following the
retirement of Simon Weber, and he remained at its helm until last
month.
  ``The death of Strigler marks not only a sad transition for his
colleagues in the Yiddish, Russian, and English editions of the Forward
but also a milestone in the area of Yiddish-language journalism and the
literature of the Holocaust,'' the English-language Forward said in an
obituary.
  I ask to have printed in the Record the English edition of the
Forward's moving editorial tribute to this talented journalist.

                           Mordechai Strigler

       Mordechai Strigler, the editor of the Yiddish Forward who
     died Sunday at the age of 76, was one of the giants. Born at
     Zamosc, Poland, he became famous at a young age as a genius
     of Talmud. He was apprenticed to the greatest sages of his
     time. He was at the barricades in Warsaw when the Germans
     invaded. He fled toward Russia, but was captured by the
     Nazis, who cast him into concentration camps. His parents and
     three of his seven sisters perished. He himself was in, among
     other camps, Maidenek, Skarhisko and Buchenwald, where he was
     a member of the Resistance and where on liberation he was
     spotted by Meyer Levin, who wrote about his heroism in his
     memoir ``In Search''. Levin told of Strigler gathering
     children secretly in the barracks and teaching them Yiddish
     and Hebrew. He had lost his pre-war manuscripts during the
     war. It is said that upon liberation he began writing
     furiously. He continued until weeks before he died. He turned
     out cycles of poetry and novels, as well as biblical
     commentaries and analysis of rabbinic responsa and thousands
     of items of journalism--editorials, dispatches, criticism and
     feuilletons. Moving to Paris immediately after the war, he
     became editor of Unzer Vort and joined the Labor Zionist
     movement. As editor of the Yiddisher Kemfer and, later, the
     Yiddish Forward as well, he maintained a courteous and gentle
     exterior, but it belied an extraordinary toughness. No matter
     how others around him might fume, he would go on doing what
     he thought was right. His achievements are well known. He
     touched Jews the world over, inspired his colleagues and set
     a standard to which all the editors of the Forward, in
     Yiddish, Russian, and English, look up.
       Yet for all these achievements, there was a dimension to
     Mordechai Strigler that remained a mystery, even to many of
     us who worked in the same editorial rooms with him for years.
     It had to do with his spiritual journey. Had history taken a
     different turn, it is as a Torah sage that he might be
     remembered today. But the Holocaust shook his faith and led
     him to quarrel with God. He emerged to write poetry and
     fiction. He entered the political fray for the labor faction.
     Hope came to him from the establishment of the Jewish state,
     which became, along with Jewish unity, his abiding passion.
     After he reached America, he began corresponding with a young
     woman in Jerusalem, Esther Bonni, a scientist. When they
     finally met in Israel, a romance developed and marriage
     followed. After the birth of their daughter, Leah, the
     glimmer of Strigler's spiritual life began to shine again.
     Leah talked at his funeral of Strigler's enduring attachment
     to text and of his powers as a teacher. He was obsessed with
     the accuracy of citations of Torah and Talmud, so that
     whenever she asked a question, he would insist on checking
     sources, even though he almost always knew the references by
     heart. In recent years, his intimates relate, he had occasion
     to lay tefillin. Even then it was said that he had not again
     become a believer but was merely observing a mitzvah. Yet as
     he lay dying at Roosevelt Hospital, his daughter read to him
     for days from the Bible, holding the text in one hand and
     here father's hand in the other. His daughter and wife sang
     prayers in Yiddish and Hebrew, which for precious moments
     brought him out of his coma. This is how this editor who had
     lived and chronicled and tragedies and triumphs of our
     century spent his last days--called back to consciousness,
     however fleetingly, by the languages of the Jews.<bullet>

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 28 May 1998 11:33:25 +0100
From: Percy Mett <p.mett@open.ac.uk>
Subject: Mordechai Strigler

The following appeared in The Daily Telegraph (London). Sorry for the delay
but I've only just picked up the electronic version. 

Mordechai Strigler, who has died aged 76, was the editor of Forward
(Forverts), the Yiddish-language newspaper which was founded in New York in
1897 and provided a gateway into American life for generations of
newly-arrived Jews from Russia and Eastern Europe, guiding them to the
mysteries and manners of the New World. 

At the peak of its influence, in the 1920s, Forward's circulation exceeded a
quarter of a million, but by the time Strigler took over the editorship, in
the late 1980s, its readership was declining. From his office, in the
Workmen's Circle Building on East 33rd Street, Manhattan, Strigler struggled
to keep the paper alive. 

Strigler was one of the most prolific Yiddish writers of the post-war period; 
he was a poet, essayist, cultural historian, rabbinic scholar, political
commentator and writer of fiction. He wrote thousands of articles. His
Oysgebrente Likht (Extinguished Candle), a six-volume autobiographical work
written in a poetic style about his experiences during the Holocaust, was an
astounding work, and among the first accounts written of that period by a
survivor. 

Mordechai Strigler was born on September 18 1921 at Zamosc, near Lublin, in
Poland, one of eight children in an Hasidic family. At 11, he was sent to the
Kletzker Yeshiva, one of Poland's most distinguished Jewish theological
institution, and at 16 he was ordained as a rabbi.  He then went to Warsaw,
where he worked as a secretary for a well-known rabbi, Zvi Yehezkel Michelson,
and taught classes in the Talmud to adults in various synagogues.  At the
outbreak of the Second World War, Strigler fought at the barricades of Warsaw
alongside Polish partisans. Trying to escape to Russia, he was arrested at the
border by German soldiers who carved swastikas into his cheeks and forehead
with a razor blade. 

[...]

"Our camp was put on the march," Strigler told Levin. "We had to go 15 miles,
in a column 10 abreast. They told us to run and they rode alongside the column
and fired into it all the time. Our comrades dropped around us, and we filled
up to 10 abreast and they shot, shot, shot." 

Strigler and the other Jews had been herded into the Ishbitza ghetto, about 30
miles from Lublin, where a mass slaughter began. His parents and three of his
sisters perished in the camps. 

Strigler was liberated from Buchenwald on April 11 1945. After recuperation,
he accompanied a transport of Jewish orphans to Paris, where he stayed and
began his autobiographical series. All his manuscripts of the war years were
lost. The autobiography consisted of Majdanek in 1947; In Di Fabrikn Fun Toyt
(In the Death Factories) in 1948; Verk Tze (Factory C), two volumes in 1950;
and Goyroles (Destinies), two volumes in 1952. In Paris he also became editor
of the daily Yiddish newspaper, Unzer Vort (Our Word).

In 1953, Strigler travelled to America on a lecture tour and decided to stay,
becoming editor of the labour Zionist weekly journal Yidisher Kemfer (Jewish
Struggler). At Yidisher Kemfer, Strigler published most of the great Yiddish
writers of his time, including Abraham Reizen, H Leivik, Chaim Grade, Jacob
Glatstein and Isaac Bashevis Singer. 

He wrote for the paper using some 20 pseudonyms, a tradition in Yiddish
writing, with a special pseudonym reserved for a particular topic. Among these
pseudonyms were: A Kore (A Reader), A Ben Ami (Son of the People), M Ragil (A
Simple Person), and Z Kamai (An Old-Fashioned Man). 

Around the time Strigler took on the editorship of Yidisher Kemfer (he
remained there until 1995), he began writing for the Yiddish Forward. Among
his first contributions was She'elot ve T'shuvot (Questions and Answers), a
series on Jewish responsa literature, about the questions people ask rabbis. 

In 1987, Strigler became editor of Forward, which then had about 10,000
readers, mostly in the United States and the former Soviet Union. But with the
number of readers dying off, Strigler founded, in 1990, the English language
Forward for a new English-speaking generation of Jews who did not know
Yiddish. Its circulation is about 26,000. 

With most of his colleagues older than himself, Strigler, a diminutive scholar
with thick glasses and titanic energy, had to do most of the writing and
editing.  "I come in, and here someone is sick, there someone is sick, so I
have to finish things on my own," he told the New Yorker in 1994. "What can I
do?" 

Strigler considered leaving New York and going to Israel, where his wife
Esther was a teacher at the Hebrew University. But in the end, he said, "I'm
the last one that can edit the paper. That's what they tell me." 

Strigler and his wife had a daughter.

Percy Mett

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 25 May 1998 19:02:34 -0700
From: Al Merkrebs <alm@sonic.net>
Subject: Veb-verterbikher/ On-line dictionaries

Sholem Berger asked about computerized Yiddish dictionary.

I am not aware of the YIVO project.  However, I have begun building my own
"online" Yiddish-English dictionary using Dvir Software's Q-Text (ver 8.0). 
 I only have a few hundred entries, but it is a beginning.  This type of
document could be put on the Internet, but it would only be available to
users of Q-Text.  I wonder if there are other Mendelyaner's who have done
something similar?   I am open to any kind of collaborative effort.  You
can reply to me privately at alm@sonic.net.  

Thank you,
Allen Hillel Merkrebs

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 May 1998 18:16:52 -0700 (PDT)
From: Aviva Starkman <avivas@emu.sp.trw.com>
Subject: Vilde chaya

I have to tell you that the discussion about "vilde chaya" has mystified me,
because to me it is such a commonplace term!  When my brothers and I were
little (I'm 22 now) and behaving rowdy, running around and making noise, my
parents would call us vilde chayas.  The same would go for any such group of
kids, or even an individual child.  And the phrase was as ordinary as "mamele"
or "zeiskeyt".  I have never heard any darker uses for "vilde chaya" either. 

Deena Mersky hoped "that there was an element of affection in the
appellation."  I never felt any-- to me it just sounded like the expression of
a harried parent.  Hershl Bershady wrote about "bandeet".  In our family,
"BAHN-dit" was also common.  A small child who cleverly got into something he
wasn't supposed to would be called a little bahndit.  That was a term that had
the element of affection.  But only boys could be bahndits. 
 
Aviva Starkman
Los Angeles, CA

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 27 May 1998 08:11:42
From: Eve Russ <eruss@aecom.yu.edu>
Subject: vilde chaye

To the gentlemen who said he hasn't found anyone under 40 who knows of the
term vilde chaye, please meet my 7 year old daughter and 3 year old son.
They are all too well versed in this phrase and others such as bandeet,
paskudniak, etc.  I suppose they've been called these phrases a few times.  

Eve Edelman Russ
Larchmont, New York

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 27 May 1998 16:24:12 EDT
From: HrgSmes@aol.com
Subject: vilde chaya

viele gedanken zu allen  re  your comments on vilde chaya  also received a few
others outside the MENDELE list  should anyone like a copy of the review (it
was of THE BUTCHER BOY) please let me have your snailmail addresses as AOL is
very chancy about downloading

altho my yiddish is extremely imperfect, I will continue following your very
interesting threads

harvey roy greenberg

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 May 1998 22:52:04 -0500 (EST)
From: Nina Warnke <nwarnke@indiana.edu>
Subject: Schlemiel

Dan Leeson was wondering about the meaning and origins of Schlemiel. The
following information may help. 

In 1813, the German Romantic writer Adelbert von Chamisso wrote the novella
"Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte" (Peter Schlemihl's strange story)
which is about a man who is giving away his shadow to the devil in exchange
for a magic bag which produces money. 

In a letter to his brother, Chamisso explained the name Schlemihl: "It is a
Hebrew name and means Gottlieb (the one who loves God), Theophil...This is the
term Jews use for clumsy or unhappy people."

Whether or not Chamisso is correct in his assumption about the Hebrew origin
is another matter; what is interesting is that this was his association with
the word Schlemiel. 

Within 2 decades the story had been translated into French, Italian, and
English and was well-known all over Europe. Thus the connection to "Hoffmanns
Erzaehlungen."

Nina Warnke
Indiana University

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 May 1998 21:10:41 -0700
From: martind@cs.berkeley.edu (Martin Davis)
Subject: Schlemiel

As I mentioned once before on Mendele, when I was studying German in high
school we used a reader containing several German folk tales (Maerchen). One
of these was called "Peter Schlemiel's Wundersame Geschichte" (Peter
Schlemiel's Remarkable Tale). The unfortunate Peter lost his shadow.

I have always assumed that Offenbach took the character from this tale, and
that the Yiddish word derived from the same source. But of course my evidence
is pretty weak. Any more informed opinions? 

Martin Davis

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 27 May 1998 10:32:06 -0400 (EDT)
From: ACHIM1 <Achim1@cris.com>
Subject: Schlemiel

Dan Leeson's comments about the word "Schlemiehl" in Germany need some
revision.  The character of Peter Schlemiehl, the man who lost his shadow, was
actually created not by Jews but by two German Gentile authors, Adalbert
Chamisso (1781-1838) and E.T.A. Hoffmann (1776-1822), long before the Bismarck
regime emancipated Germany's Jews (at least on paper) during the 1870s-1880s). 
Schlemiehl, stressed on the last syllable (contrary to Leeson's erroneous
stress on the first syllable), is indeed a character in Offenbach's opera Les
Contes d'Hoffmann (posthumously revised by Leo Delibes); since the libretto
was written in French by (if memory serves me) Meilhac and Halevi, the
character's name, like any native or borrowed French word, is stressed on the
final syllable.  In German, the word Schlemiehl, although probably of Yiddish
origin, does not specifically refer to a Jew--it's synonymous with
"Pechvogel"--an unlucky person.  The word is virtually extinct in German, but
I still hear it occasionally among older German-speaking Jews.  In English its
effect is comical, but not in the German fantasies about the man who lost his
shadow--he's actually a grotesquely tragic figure--with, however a certain
goofy shadow-bereftness. 
        
Incidentally, the Offenbach opera is based on more than three Hoffmann tales: 
for instance, the wonderful first-act aria "Kleinzach"  derives from Hoffman's
story "Klein Zaches" (no, the character isn't Jewish). Offenbach, who was born
in Cologne in 1819 (and moved to Paris in 1833)  presumably got the Schlemiehl
character from Hoffmann and Chamisso. 
        
Mr. Leeson could find all this information in various dictionaries and other
reference works. 
                                        
Joachim Neugroschel
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.007

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html





