
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.024
August 29, 1999

1) Yiddish and Hebrew -- end of a feud? (Abraham Brumberg)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1999 14:54:09 -0400 (EDT)
From: abraham brumberg <102142.2545@compuserve.com>
Subject: Yiddish and Hebrew -- end of a feud?
     
The dispute between Yiddish and Hebrew wracked the Jewish secular world
during the early part of this century, and remains a contentious issue to
this day.  At first blush the persistence of this feud seems absurd.  The
Bund, which has historically been the main champion of Yiddish as the
language of the vast majority of Jews in Poland, Ukraine and Belorussia, is
virtually no more. And the millions of Jews whom it had so valiantly
represented and defended are largely gone, too. 
      
It made sense for the Bund and some smaller groups such as the "Folkists,"
the "Territorialists," and until the late l930s the Left Poale Zion, to
insist that Jews in Eastern Europe be granted rights as a national minority.
(I leave out the Communists, whose loyalty to Yiddish never exceeded their
unconditional fealty to the Third Rome.) These rights, they maintained,
should include "cultural autonomy" in the form of state-subsidized schools
and other educational and administrative institutions, and also, in those
areas where Jew constituted a compact presence, the use of Yiddish in courts
and other state institutions. 
     
Though the latter were soon dropped by the Bund as impractical, the issue of
national cultural autonomy (borrowed, incidentally, from the Austrian Social
Democrats) was central to the ideology of "doikayt" (hereness), which
maintained that the Jewish massesmust struggle for their rights wherever
they reside, and not place their hopes on the chimera of the "in-gathering"
of Jews in a distant and inhospitable part of the world.  As long as
millions ofJews were bound to stay in Eastern Europe and as long as
theoverwhelming majority of them could not and did not wish to be uprooted,
Yiddish was an essential component of the Bund's ideology, a realistic
political option. 
     
Similarly, it was reasonable for the Zionists of the first three aliyas
(from the turn of the century into the early thirties)  to insist that a
nascent Jewish homeland--or state--inhabited by people speaking a variety of
tongues must have one unifying language, and that this must be Hebrew, the
historic language of all Jews, albeit one that was spoken for the past few
centuries by only a tiny minority of Jews.  The revival and establishment of
a modern Hebrew language was thus for the Zionists of crucially symbolic as
well as of pragmatic significance--certainly during the first few years of
building the "Yishuv." 
     
"Yiddishists" and "Hebraists"--however imprecise the terms-- came in
different shapes and forms.  For many proponents of Yiddish, the language
and culture represented an end in itself.  For others, it was a means to an
end.  The history of the Bund's championship of Yiddish provides an
instructive example of the relation between these two concepts, or perhaps
the transmutation of one concept into another. At first, the Bund defended
Yiddish as the language of the overwhelming majority of Jews in Eastern
Europe.  The struggle for Yiddish was seen as part of the struggle for the
rights of people humiliated, disenfranchised, and exploited, a struggle for
their dignity a human being and as Jews.  It was not until l904-5 that the
Bund embraced Yiddish as a discrete goal, and became involved in creating
cultural institutions in Yiddish, supporting the growth of Yiddish
journalism and literature and enlisting many Yiddish writers into its rank
both as members and as "sympathizers." Indeed, in interwar Poland the Bund
cannot possibly be understood apart from its role in fostering a Yiddish
secular culture. 
     
The Bund's struggle against Hebrew was not dictated by hostility or ill will
towards the language as such, however much Hebrew was largely identified
with the religious side of the Jewishhistorical experience.  Rather, it was
part of the Bund's rejection of Zionism (the principal secular champion of
Hebrew) as an ideology that diverted the masses from struggling for their
genuine rights.  What was the point of educating Jewish children in Hebrew
if the vast majority of them was bound to--and indeed should--remain in
Poland? The insistence on Hebrew, then, was seen by the Bund as almost as
deleterious as assimilation, an option which the Bund strenuously denounced. 
As for the tiny minority of Bundists who found themselves in Palestine in
the 1920s and became more numerous in the aftermath of the Second World
War,
they campaigned not against Hebrew (which would have been rather pointless),
but against the suppression of Yiddish.  (Some of them insisted tht Yiddish
and not Hebrewb declared the state language, but they were in a distinct
minority.) 
     
The Hebraists, apart from the purely religious elements whose attitudes
towards Yiddish--pro and con--are shaped by religious considerations, were
almost exclusively Zionists of various hues and persuasions. Despite what
was for many of them a profound attachment to the Yiddish language and
literature, they fought against the use Yiddish in Palestine and created
legislation that made it impossible--that is to say, illegal--to establish a
Yiddish theater, publish a daily in the Yiddish language, establish Yiddish
schools, and other Yiddish-language institutions Political and ideological
considerations superceded all others.  Yiddish had to be combatted more
vigorously than any other language, for the simple reason that it threatened
the hegemony of Hebrew. 
     
Recently it has become fashionable for some Zionist spokesmen to deny that
Yiddish had at one time been virtually proscribed by the leaders of the
Jewish community in Palestine, then in Israel.  In December of l997, for
instance, at a scholarly conference about the Bund held in Warsaw, several
Israeli scholars vehemently denied that this was ever the case. (Their major
opponent at the conference was the Polish sociologist Alina Cala.) But this
is absurd: the bitter struggle against Yiddish and anti-Yiddish legislation
are part of recorded history. 
     
But those who opposed Yiddish on "rational" grounds (however valid or
invalid) constituted a minority.  For most, the struggle against Yiddish was
rooted in a hatred of anything that was connected with the "Diaspora",
considered to be marked by self-deprecation and cringing submission to
non-Jews, a culture that was thoroughly second-rate, lacking in any
estimable qualities, counterfeit and meretricious. 
     
This image of the Diaspora was for a long time central to Zionism. As the
American historian Howard Sachar notes in his A History of Zionism (vol I,
l986, p. 718), the dominant Zionist image of the overseas Jewish community
was one of "half men, or at least an inferior breed of half Jews." The
original Israeli reaction to the Holocaust was also shaped by this image.
The millions of victims were considered cowardly, as one Israeli scholar put
it, "inferior human beings that went like lambs to the slaughter." (Dina
Porat,The Blue and the Yellow Stars of David, Cambridge, Mass, l990, p. 239) 
     
Yiddish, the language of most of those miserable "half Jews"  earned equal
contempt, if not outright hatred. As Benjamin Harshav points out in his
brilliant Language and Revolution (Berkeley, l993, p. 157), the conventional
wisdom, "first formulated most harshly by Moses Mendelssohn, [held] that
Yiddish was a perverted language, reflecting the perversion of the soul of
the Diaspora Jew. The revulsion from it," Harshav continues," is a recoil
from Diaspora existence, from the Yiddish language--the mother tongue,
intimate and hated at the same time, from the parental home of the shtetl,
corroded by idleness and Jewish trading, and from the irrational and
primitive behavior of the Hasidim." 
     
An exaggeration? Hardly. For several decades Yiddish was not only hounded by
"legal means," but Yiddish speakers were often insulted on the streets,
Yiddish concerts and lectures were harassed by youths wielding stones or
rotten tomatoes. Only a few years ago a Jewish woman born in Germany
confided in me that she "simply could not suffer the sound of the Yiddish
language, so vulgar, so unbearably ugly."  And it was Ben Gurion himself
who, in the company of several hundred kibbutzniks, listened in 1945 for
several hours to the harrowing tale of Rozka Korczak, a member of the
Hashomer Hatzair, the first resistance fighter to reach to Palestine after
the war. He then opined that "it was all very moving, and would have been
even more so if Rozka had not been speaking in that grating language"  (Tom
Segev , The Seventh Million, New York, l993, p. l80). (Forty years earlier
Ben Gurion, a young khalutz just arrived in the Holy Land, edited a Yiddish
daily for fellow-kibbutzniks who spoke no Hebrew,as indeed he himself had
not for the first few years of his life.) 
     
Times, naturally, have changed.  There are Yiddish theaters and a Yiddish
daily in Israel, Yiddish courses are offered in Israeli uiversities, an
excellent literary journal under the editorship of the Yiddish poet Avrom
Sutskever appeared for several decades in Tel Aviv until about a year ago,
and many of those who had damned the language and assaulted its speakers
now
tend to approach it with something akin to piety. The Holocaust is studied
and memorialized,the victims of the Nazis are now portrayed as heroes,
thetraditions of the galut are no longer approached in a spirit of derision
but respect. Zionism and Hebrew have prospered and Yiddish is no longer
either a competitor or an enemy. 
     
Outside Israel Yiddish is taught at universities. Groups here and there
cultivate an interest in Yiddish, Yiddish linguistics and Yiddish culture,
with several active internet web sites. Yiddish poetry and prose (such as
the books of the Nobel winner Isaac Bashevis Singer)has been translated into
several languages, Yiddish courses have been offered, under the sponsorship
of the New York based YIVO (Jewish Scientific Institute) in Warsaw and
Vilnius (though in the "Jerusalem of Lithuania," the one-time capital of
Yiddish, all but a handful of Yiddish-speaking Jews still survive). 

Of the one-time four Yiddish dailies in New York,only one,the venerable
Forverts, still comes out--once a week.  Yiddish day nd afternoon schools in
the United States are no more.  But Yiddish music (via the klezmer
tradition) is the rage in Western Europe, Poland, Russia and the United
States, and learned confences about Uoiddish and Yiddish literature, old and
new, take place--even, mirabile dictum, in Germany.  An amateur Yiddish
theater performs in New York City several times a year.  The Yiddish Book
Center in Amherst, Massachusetts, has amassed a splendid library of Yiddish
books, and whenever its budget allows (which unfortunately is not too often
these days...) the Center sponsors Yiddish lectures, even though none of its
officers nor the editor of its journal speaks Yiddish with any degree of
fluency. 
        
By and large, then, Yiddish, for all the sedulous, praiseworthy, and heroic
efforts to keep Yiddish alive, it would be absurd to deny its gradual
decline.  The ranks of Yiddish speakers are shrinking (except among the
ultra-orthodox), its tattered role vis-a-vis Hebrew a sad but established
fact. 
     
And yet: old passions do not swiftly fade away, nor does the force of
ideological coommitments.  In Russia a few weeks ago, I heard stories of the
Jewish Agency, which subsidizes cultural and educational activities in that
part of the world, refusing to provide funds for Yiddish (as distinguished
from Hebrew) schools, this despite the interest still shown in it by Russian
Jews, and of a youth organization that was deprived of funds by the Jewish
Agency and thus forced to disband, because of its lack of a proper "aliya
spirit."  Although the Knesset has passed a law recognizing several "Jewish
languages" to be worthy of government support, Ladino, with virtually no
surviving speakers and hardly any literary credentials, is regularly propped
up while Yiddish receives virtually no funds. The feud, then, still seems to
go on --even if one of the contestants has virtually laid down its arms. It
is a pathetic and shameful story. 

Abraham Brumberg

Abraham Brumberg has written widely on Russia, Eastern Europe, and
contemprary Jewish affairs.  He has also authored articles in Yiddish and is
the performer of an album called "Of Lovers, Dreamers, and Thieves--Yiddish
Folk Songs from Eastern Europe." 
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.024

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



