
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.039
November 1, 1999

1) Risen from the dead (Abraham Brumberg)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1999 15:33:17 -0400 (EDT)
From: abraham brumberg <ABrumberg@compuserve.com>
Subject: Risen from the dead (The Politics of Yiddish - Book Review)

   [To be published in The Jewish Quarterly (London) - one of the leading
   Jewish literary and cultural journals, now amalgamated with the Jewish
   Book News & Reviews. Selected materials, subscription information and
   other details at http://www.jq.ort.org/         -i.v.]


RISEN FROM THE DEAD?

   The Politics of Yiddish: Studies in Language, Literature and Society
   (Winter studies in Yiddish ; v. 4). Edited by Dov-Ber Kerler. 
   Walnut Creek, CA : AltaMira Press, 1998; 212 pp. 
   ISBN: 0761990240; 0761990259 (pbk.)
        
"Is Yiddish Dead?" (or, alternatively, "dying") is a question that comes up
repeatedly in commentaries and debates, recently in these pages in an essay
by Janet Hadda and Iosif Vaisman's spirited reply (TJQ Summer 1998 and
Winter 1998 respectively).  The appearnce of The Politics of Yiddish, then,
is timely.  Ably edited by Dov-Ber Kerler, who teaches Yiddish and Yiddish
literature at the Oxford Center for Hebrew and Yiddish Studies and is a
gifted Yiddish poet to boot (one of the few of his generation), this volume
helps us differentiate between calls for action on the one hand, and for
serious deliberations on the other.
        
Suggest that Yiddish might be--or has been-- in a process of erosion and you
get a veritable storm of passionate rejoinders.  Historical parallels,
legitimate or not, are cited, ringing Yiddish verses are dredged up,
indignant denials fill the air, and those who voice such suggestions are
denounced as ignoramuses or veritable traitors to the Jewish people..  Yet
all this brouhaha is quite gratuitous, for it should be clear by now that
Yiddish is indeed still alive and kicking, though in an altogether different
reincarnation than in the past..
        
There is no dearth of evidence for it.  Yiddish has become an object of
pervasive interest and curiosity.  Courses in Yiddish and Yiddish literature
are taught in universities and even high schools, including, mirabile
dictum, in Israel.  Klezmer ensembles (virtually unknown 20 years ago)
perform Jewish music at hundreds of camps, festivals, and concerts.  Last
summer Toronto was the scene of a week-long Yiddish festival, attended by
several thousands spectators and nearly 200 performers.  Scholars meet for
conferences in Europe, Israel, and the United States.  And other examples
abound. 
        
Several reasons for this remarkable phenomenon come to mind: the reaction
(however belated) to the Holocaust, the feverish search for "roots" and
identity on the part of the post-Holocaust generations, perhaps a sense of
nostalgia for a world that is no more but which one would like to be at one
with..  Whatever the reason or reasons, the Yiddish revival is undeniable. 
         
Yet having said this, two caveats are in order: First, the reification of
Yiddish must not be confused with the use of Yiddish for conversational
purposes.  I know very few young (and for that matter slightly older...)
Yiddish scholars who actually speak Yiddish.  Yiddish is admired, studied,
written about, performed--but not spoken.  Yiddish as an element of a live,
vigorous daily culture no longer exists. This constitutes the fundamental
difference between the prewar role of Yiddish and its present incarnation.. 
        
Take, for example, the National Yiddish Book Center in Amherst, Mass.,
founded about 15 years ago by an enterprising young Yiddish scholar Aaron
Lansky.  The Center has come to play a significant role in the Yiddish
revival.  It has one of the largest collections of Yiddish volumes in the
United States (most of them donated by private individuals), and sponsors
Yiddish lectures, recitations, and the like.  Yet hardly any of the
dedicated men and women who work there knows Yiddish fluently. 
        
The second caveat pertains to the Yiddish used by the haredi, the
ultra-orthodox, mainly hasidic Jews in Israel (mainly Jerusalem) and in
some other areas throughout the world.  Joshua Fishman, one of the foremost
American socio-linguists working in the field of Yiddish, maintains that the
undoubted increase of Yiddish among them attests to the continued viability
of the language.. Difference between the Yiddish used by the haredi and
secular Jews, however fascinating linguistically and culturally, render both
equal pillars of today's "Yiddishkayt." 
        
But this surely begs the issue.  The real florescence of Yiddish, between
about the middle of the 19th century until the Holocaust, was above all a
secular phenomenon.  Yiddish prose, poetry, scholarship, ethnography, let
alone the development of a Yiddish press, theater, schools, political
movements dedicated to maintaining Yiddish culture all took place outside
the religious community, and hardly impinged on the use of Yiddish by the
latter.  Imagine Yiddish without Sholom Aleichem, without Peretz, Avrom
Sutskever, H. Leivik, the vilner trupe , without Maurice Schwartz, Avrom
Goldfagen, without the YIVO; imagine Yiddish without the historical values
embedded in modern Yiddish literature., from Peretz to Chaim Grade. The
result is a barren and bleak landscape. 
        
This brings me to the book under review, and first to the essay "Yiddish in
the Orthodox Communities of Jerusalem," by Miriam Isaacs.  Professor of
Yiddish Studies at Maryland University, .Ms. Isaacs is a thoroughly secular
Jew, but with an abiding and open-minded interest in the Yiddish of the
ultra-orthodox.  An assiduous scholar, she compares the various dialects of
Yiddish within that community, its role at home and in schools (in the
latter as the language in which secular subjects such as chemistry and
physics are taught), the diffderences in teaching Yiddish in haredi girls'
and boys' schools, its relationship to loshn koydesh--the Ashkenazy Hebrew
used in teaching religious subjects-- the extent to which Yiddish is used in
intra-personal relationships outside of school and home, the use of standard
Hebrew. .  (Only a small group of ultra-orthodox Jews, who belong to the
right-wing fanatic group "Naturei Karta" refuses to use Hebrew, the
"language of Zionism"--which they reject--and which will be spoken only when
the Messiah returns to earth.) 
        
Though Isaacs is obviously impressed with the use of Yiddish among the
haredim, she does not ignore some of its more troublesome aspects.  Thus,
she writes, most teachers of Yiddish, however great their sentiment for the
language, maintain that it has no formal structure or grammar, and refuse to
teach anything that smacks of secular values, such as modern Yiddish
literature.  Yiddish literature may have absorbed centuries-old religious
values and experiences--think of Sholem Ash or Bashevis Singer, or Shmuel
An-sky, or for that matter the Yiddish poet Avrom Liesin --but the
ultrra-orthodox do not reciprocate, ignoring and rejecting anything relating
to secular Judaism.  (This point, incidentally, is developed in the
excellent essay "Yiddishism and Judaism," by the distinguished scholar
Emanuel S. Goldstein, which opens The Politics of Yiddish). 
        
Another disturbing aspect is that because of the disdain still prevalent in
Israel towards Yiddish in general and toward the Yiddish of the haredim in
particular, many ultra-orthodox Jews conversing in Yiddish on the street
will suddenly switch to Hebrew if a secular-looking Jew should approach
them. (I am reminded of Jews speaking Yiddish in a Moscow park one afternoon
in the 1960s. They launched into Russian when I came near by--clearly I was
not one of them. In both cases, this behavior was--is-- a mark of rank
insecurity.) 
        
The title of the Kerler volume, The Politics of Yiddish, is eminently apt.
The history of modern Yiddish has been forged in many struggles--internal,
vis-a-vis detractors and competitors, with ideological foes and against
enemies bent on destroying not only Yiddish but the Jewish ethos in general.
In his "The Politics of Research on Spoken Yiddish," the eminent Yiddfish
linguist Rakhmiel Peltz deals with how political and ideological assumptions
and values shaped linguistic research, particularly in the Soviet Union and
in the United States.  In both countries, he demonstrates compellingly,
"linguistic research ...was a political entrerprise.  The obsession with
normativism and predetermined standards of what constituted the refined
kulturshprakh led the linguists to intentionally overlook the ways of
speaking of most Yiddish speakers." (Unhappily, the marvelous
Yiddish-English and English-Yiddish dictionary by the late Uriel Weinreich
displays just such a normative attitude, in which the question of "what
should" often takes the place of "what is.") 
        
The vicissistudes of the relationship betweeen the Left and Yiddish in the
United States is examined in three essays, of which Milton Doroshkin's
"Yiddish Socialist Press in New York, 1880s-1920s" and Edna Nahson's "Art
and Politics: the Case of the New York Artef Theatre (1925-1940)," are the
most interesting.  In the first, the author traces the history of the
left-oriented press (which is to say almost the entire Yiddish press) from
the early 20th century, reaching a print run of 537,982 in New York and
716,146 (!) nationally, before declining and having to compete, as of the
early 1920s, with the Communist Morgn frayhat.  The second essay deals with
the little known Yiddish theater maintained in the mid-1920s until 1940 by
the Jewish Communist movement, scoring notable artistic successes, but
finally collapsing--not surprisingly--after the Hitler-Stalin Pact.  During
the 1930s, various Communist Yiddish enterprises (journals, theatre, etc.)
were supported not only by party members, but also by a number of
distinguished Yiddish writers and poets--to all effects and purposes at that
time "fellow travellers"-- such as H. Leivick, Peretz Hirshbeyn and Khaim
Zhitlovsky. Stalin's toast to "the health of Herr Hitler whom I know the
German nation loves" was too much not only for them, of course. but for a
great number of genuine believers who upped anf left the party in droves. 
        
The fate of Soviet Yiddish literature, scholarship, and of several
prominentt Yiddish writers and the actor and theatre director Shloyme
Mikhoels, victim of a grisly assassination masterminded by Stalin) 
constitutes perhaps the most tragic chapter in the history of Yiddish
letters, the non plus ultra of maniacal political persecution in literature
and the arts, is the subject of several essays.  Of them, the essay on Dovid
Hofshteyn, one of the Russia's most inspired Yiddish poets and a man who
religiously put his trust in both the Jewish and the general humanitarian
promises of the Russian Revolution, is outstanding. It was written by Josif
Kerler, father of the editor of this volume, and a distinguished Yiddish
poet, now living in Israel.  Hofshteyn's poetry, which he began writing
around the time of World War I, was imbued with intoxicating images,
unexpected rhymes and an innovative language not known in any other center
of Yiddish poetrry, including in the United States, where the modernist
group "Di yunge" was thriving at that time. Like other Soviet Yiddish
writers and poets, including the prose-writer, Dovid Bergelson, Hofshteyn
(spelled Hofstein in the book) had been forced during the late 1920s and
1930s to censor his own poetry, excise specific words and phrases (such as
Hebraisms that smacked of "clericalism" and Zionism), to engage in
debilitating mea culpas.  In addition both he and Bergelson, could never
live down the fact that as young men they both had lived in Palestine, and
wrote at that time in Hebrew.  Their apologies and "self-criticisms" proved
of no avail..  In August 1952, Hofshteyn, Bergelson and l3 other defendants,
including two other Yiddish writers, were tried for "treason" and promptly
dispatched with KGB bullets in the backs of their necks. 
        
I cannot resist citing one poem by Hofshteyn, a veritable gem, written
around 1918-1919. 

mir shtamen fun felzn,
fun felzn tsemolte oyf milshteyn fun tsaytn..
mir shtamen fun felzn
vos hobn dem goyrl farbundn
mit yamen,
mit vintn,
mit vaytn...
Mir shtamen fun felzn
vos hobn tsebrokhn
dem yokh fun'm glivernem shteyn--
mir geyen
un velder nor viste
undz konen farhaltn...
Mir zaynen di ershte
in faldn fun vintn,
mit vikhers gebundn,
mit khvalies geshvestert, 
gebrudert mit shturem--
keyn mizrakh, keyn mayrev, keyn tsofn, keyn dorem!

(We spring from rocks/from rocks ground by millstones of time/ We spring
from rocks/ we have tied our fate/ to oceans/to winds/ to yonder../ We
spring from rocks/that shattered the yoke /of boulders--/we march on/and
only the thickest of forests/can thwart us.../We are the first who reached/
the folds of the winds,/ we are lashed to gales/sistered with waves/
brothered with tempests/ surging onward east and west, northward and
southward! (I have modified the translation in the book). 
        
On a personal note:  Of the many splendid essays, which I am unable discuss
within the confines of this review, one won me over particularly. I had
known something about Yiddish in England from the turn of the century into
the 1930s, but nothing prepared me for the wealth of details, lovingly
rendered by Raphaela Lewis, in her "Petticoat Lane and the North-West
Passage (London, 1880-1940)".  Who would have known that Karl Marx's
daughter Eleanor Aveling-Marx learned Yiddish "in order to help in the
effort to unionize immigrant tailors"?  That from 1900 to 1937 "the old
Pavilion Theatree in Whitechapel Road was given over entirely to the Jewish
community," which used it for plays and prayers?  That in 1912 "Feinman's
Yiddish People's Theatre" opened in Commercial Road with seating for 1500,
and staged 'Rigoletto' in Yiddish?"  "Rigoletto," mind you, not "La Juive"! 
        
And so, in the end, I put down my copy of The Politics of Yiddish,
moved, saddened but also delighted and enriched.

Abraham Brumberg

  Abraham Brumberg is an expert on Russian and East European affairs. He
  writes for The Times Literary Supplement, The New York Times, and
  elsewhere. He has also been active in Yiddish letters: his work has
  appeared in Yiddish journals and newspapers, and he produced a record
  album, "Of Lovers, Dreamers, and Thieves--Yiddish Folk Songs from Eastern
  Europe."    
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.039

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



