
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 07.160
March 4, 1998

1) Soviet Yiddish Writers in English (Leah Zazulyer)
2) Aridoso Parshandoso's inquiry (John Biskupski)
3) Bufl fish (Cherna Wolpin)
4) Yidish vi a sod (Iosif Vaisman)
5) 'secret' language (John Patten)
6) Secret Languages (Burton (Berel) Leiser)
7) Yiddish as secret language (Louis Fridhandler)
8) Yidish vi a sod (Eliyahu Juni)
9) Iz benkshaft shedlekh? (Louis Fridhandler)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 02 Mar 1998 18:49:54 -0500 (EST)
From: Leah Watson <fam_wats@uno.cc.geneseo.edu>
Subject: Soviet Yiddish Writers in English

With reference to Hugh Denman's reply to my query re Soviet Yiddish
Writers in English: While I am aware of translations of Bergelson and Der
Nister, I am aware of no translations of POETS, except here and there a
poem or two.  Are there any chapbooks, collections, works in progress of
translation in English of any of the well known murdered poets, or other
not murdered poets of that era??    (I am aware of Israel Emiot whom I am
co-translating....)   Thanks!!!    

Leah Zazulyer 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 2 Mar 1998 20:35:13 EST
From: PolTexCW <PolTexCW@aol.com>
Subject: Aridoso Parshandoso's inquiry

I had thought that this issue, that is the genesis of the nomene "kahane",
"Cohen" etc., had been terminally put to rest by the publication, in 1927, of
Roshandvidze's _Cultural Resonances of Translinguistic Phenomenon_, in which
he demonstrated incontrovertibly that it was pellucidly of Proto-Altaic
origin.  It is cognate, for example, with the modern Japanese "kaigun" -
"navy". 

John Biskupski

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 2 Mar 1998 21:34:45 -0500
From: Martin Wolpin <MandCWolpin@compuserve.com>
Subject: Bufl fish

Having conferred with my two Mamaloshen mayvonim, a complete agreement was
reached.  Each of our mothers (unbeknowest to each other) having lived and
brought us kids up in Nev Yok (New York to others) and chopped fish every
Friday which was comprised of 1-Yellow Pike, 2- white fish and 3- Bufl and
never knew another name aside from Bufl for that portion found ourselves,
found each other after we were all relocated to a place actually called
BUFFALO.  Shopping at the fresh fish markets was an experience and learned
that Bufl was another name for Carp which was an important part of home made
gefilte fish.  Carp is not carried by many fish markets but is still sold and
is grown in healthy environments in fish farms.  Zy gezundt and enjoy, &
smile,

Cherna Wolpin 
Buffalo, New York

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 12:21:19 -0500 (EST)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: Yidish vi a sod

Miki Safadi asked if Yiddish was used as a code language for political or
military purposes [07.159]. I am sure that it was on many occasions. The
following two quotations provide both military and political examples and are
taken from the books that happened to be on my desk at the moment. 

First case is from one of the dramatic pages of Jewish resistance in
Shventsyan (Svencionys) ghetto in Lithuania as described by Yitzhak Arad in
"Neurim bi-lehimah", Tel-Aviv: Maarakhot, 1977 (pp.71-75, Russian translation
in "Unichtozhenie evreev SSSR v gody nemetskoi okkupatsii", Ierusalim: Yad
Vashem, 1991, pp. 355-358).

On April 13, 1942 two Jewish teenagers, members of the ghetto underground
Grishka Bak and Reuven Miadzielsky were arrested by Lithuanian police as a
result of an accidental shot from one of their handguns. The shot wounded
Grishka and was heard by a policeman. After the arrest the remaining 10
members of the underground group faced an excruciating dilemma: escape from
the ghetto to the forest leaving the entire ghetto hostage, or stay risking
their own lives and cause, should their arrested comrades succumb to the
torture and name the others.

A Jewish woman from the ghetto worked as a janitor in the police station. She
has seen Reuven when he was escorted to his cell after interrogation. Covered
with bruises and blood, with broken fingers he said to her in Yiddish: "Tell
the guys that they should not worry - we will not say anything. Let they
avenge our death". 

Grishka Bak and Reuven Miadzielsky were executed by the police on April 16,
1942. The underground group continued its fight and in March 1943 joined one
of the Soviet partisan brigades.

Second example comes from Yossi Beilin's "Israel: a consise political
history", N.Y.: St Martin's Press, 1992 (p.231). It is an interesting book,
although in describing the Orthodox Jews author demonstrates a bit more
arrogance and a bit less knowledge than would suit his otherwise attractive
image of a liberal intellectual. 

"Almost all the current admorim were born in Eastern Europe and arrived in
Israel in the 1940s with their parents. They speak Hebrew but prefer to
converse in Yiddish; the meetings of the Council of Torah Sages which they
attend together with several Lithuanian rabbis are generally conducted in
Yiddish. This is one of the reasons - or excuses - why not a single Sephardi
rabbi participates in these meetings. The Council is one of the only forums in
Israel which can maintain secrecy, although even from here there are
occasional leaks. Apart from the Council members, only its secretary is
present at meetings, and it is he who issues its decisions. Since 1988, this
forum - the official elite of ultra-Orthodox Jewry in Israel, most of whose
members are totally divorced from Israeli life - has become one of the most
influential bodies in Israel." 

According to Beilin this Council routinely appoints and brings down the
Israeli government, in which case this is perhaps the ultimate example of
using Yiddish as a "political" secret language. 

Yiddish has been widely used for secrecy purposes in private correspondence
subjected to censorship. Here is a Soviet joke from 1970s (my apologies to
those who remember Mendele posting of this joke several years ago).

Rabinovich is summoned to the local KGB headquarters and greeted by the
officer:

[O.] Comrade Rabinovich, you have a brother in the US, don't you?
[R. in a doomed voice] Ye-es...
[O.] Then, why you did not send a single letter to him for twenty years?
[R.] ...
[O.] Don't be afraid, comrade Rabinovich! These days we don't mind if you
     write to your brother. Our capitalist foes slander us for preventing
     families from free communication. So, you can write freely to your
     brother about how you enjoy this wonderful life in our Motherland. Here
     is the paper, why don't you start right away.

Rabinovich takes a pen:

"Mayn tayerer brider!
Plitsem ikh hob gefinen di tsayt un a plats tsu onshraybn dir a briv..."

Iosif Vaisman

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 18:41:57 +0000
From: john Patten <john@eiliepat.demon.co.uk>
Subject: 'secret' language

Yiddish could hardly be used as a 'secret' language, but the language barrier
was sometimes useful as a defence:  Albert Meltzer had a story about the
police attempting to infiltrate the Yiddish Anarchist scene in London in the
early years of the century, and so as not to send along an obvious
'anglo-saxon', sent a Welsh policeman instead - hardly inconspicous among
recently arrived immigrants- with the immortal line of 'look you already,
tovarish bach' (which is probably 'stage Welsh', but that's how i read it) 
Which may just be a tale - if i find the specific citation i'll send it along-
but does make the point that the movement had a certain amount of distance
around it - social as well as linguistic- which made these sorts of approaches
laughable.  Apparently one officer did teach himself Yiddish, only to find
that he was never promoted since that would take him away from the east end! 

john Patten

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 22:26:23 EST
From: BLeiser77 <BLeiser77@aol.com>
Subject: Secret Languages

Miki Safadi asks whether Yiddish has been used as a secret language (other
than the common attempts by parents to "encode" their talk in Yiddish to keep
the meaning of their conversations from their supposedly illiterate children).

I can't answer the question directly, though I doubt whether such use would
have been very effective, in view of the close relationship between Yiddish
and German and the relatively strong likelihood that someone overhearing it
would be able to decipher it.

But I can testify to a rather strange escapade that took place shortly before
the British gave up their mandate over Palestine.

The late Rabbi Baruch (Barry) Korff, who was my boss many years ago in
Taunton, Massachusetts, and became rather famous during the Watergate era as
Nixon's rabbi, hatched a lame-brained scheme designed to force the British out
of Palestine by bombing London.  (As Dave Barry often says, I'm not making
this up.)  He organized a small group of his Stern Gang colleagues in France,
got access to a two-seater aircraft, and hoisted a single bomb onto the lap of
one of his associates.  They were about to take off from an obscure field in
France, fly across the channel, and throw the bomb overboard as they flew over
London.  This act of terrorism was supposedly going to bring His Majesty's
Government to its knees.  Luckily for all concerned, the French authorities
got wind of the plan, and were able to arrest the gang, including Korff, just
before they took off.

Korff told me--and recorded in a book he later published--that during their
long incarceration in a French prison, he and his khaverim were occasionally
permitted to daven, especially on major Jewish holidays.  They took these
opportunities to communicate with one another by "davenen" messages in loshn
koydesh--though I don't doubt that some of these secret messages might well
have included some Yiddish words.

Korff was eventually released, thanks to U.S. diplomatic intervention.  He was
always ready to use his rabbinical title to his advantage, and this was one
time when it was most advantageous.  After Israel's war of independence, he
returned to the U.S. and took positions as a congregational rabbi, serving for
quite some time in Taunton, where he taught me whatever I know about the
cynical uses of power and intelligence.

Burton (Berel) Leiser

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 4 Mar 1998 12:26:03 EST
From: Lfridhan <Lfridhan@aol.com>
Subject: Yiddish as secret language

There is a description in fiction at least indirectly related to Miki Safadi's
query (07.159, 5) whether Yiddish was used as a secret language for
military/political purposes.  The passage is in Sholem Aleichem's Motl Peysi
dem Khazns.  Motl is about to be carted off by police when a crowd of Jewish
men tell him in Yiddish to try to get away.  They use a Yiddish enriched with
Hebrew derivatives.  Obviously, Yiddish serves as protection from the police,
an arm of an essentially military government.  See Motl Peysi dem Khazns, Book
one, Volume XVIII in the Folksfond Oysgabe, pp. 103-104.

There is a passage in Tsu der Toyb (1894) where Sholem Aleichem implies that
the use of Yiddish will keep the matter secret from others, that is, the
gentiles who can't understand it. _mir redn dokh yidish, un keyn goy vet undz
nit farshteyen_.  This is not about military matters, but is related to
social/political considerations: that is, how Jews comport themselves in a
non-Jewish world.  See Felyetonen, fun Sholem-Aleykhem, Tel Aviv: Beth Shalom-
Aleichem, I.L. Peretz Publishing House, 1976, p. 27.

I suspect fiction (Motl) and a kind of editorial comment (Tsu der Toyb)
reflect the real world of those times as Sholem Aleichem saw it.

Louis Fridhandler

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 4 Mar 1998 22:24:54 +0200
From: Eliyahu Juni <juni@fourfold.com>
Subject: Yidish vi a sod

Re M. Safadi's question [07.159] whether Yiddish has ever been used as a
secret language for political or military purposes: 

There are words and idioms in Yiddish which are used specifically when, for
whatever reason, the speaker doesn't want a non-Yiddish-speaking (non-Jewish)
audience to understand.  Many of these are derived from Hebrew, since
Hebrew-derived Yiddish is (presumed to be) not as understandable to non-Jews. 
For example, when referring to a policeman in public, instead of using
"politzay," my (Poylishe) grandparents and mother will use "Lamnatzayekh." 

Comedians Dzigan and Schumacher have a recorded skit of a telephone
conversation from the USSR to Israel, in which they use a bunch of Yiddishized
Biblical Hebrew, to avoid getting in trouble with the eavesdropping censor,
some of it taken from the names the sedres and actual psikim, e.g. VaYaytsay,
VaYise, VaYakhne, punning on "Yakhne" and the dozens of "VaYis'i VaYakhani"
psikim at the beginning of parhses Masay.)  I have heard this used on the
street in Brooklyn, and my intuition is that using a Biblical Hebrew verb in
(contemporary "haredi") Yiddish marks the subject as sensitive to non-Jewish
ears, particularly official ones. 

Yiddish is used as secret langauge politically in "haredi" society in public
speeches and announcements:  it allows the speaker to throw in a Yiddish
comment in a Hebrew or English speech that only the "in" group will
understand, if there's some reason they don't want the press or the
authorities to catch a detail or a point.  I imagine that when Rav Shach
(roshyeshive of Ponevitsh in Bnay Brak) was giving his yearly "yarkhay kale"
shmiis in front of live TV cameras, he made use of this quite a bit. 

Bloc voting by haredim is implemented by announcements in Yiddish--it's not
PC, and we know it.  Electoral monkey business in Israel (e.g. campaigning
within polling stations) has occasionally been covered up by carrying it out
in Yiddish, but the authorities have been wise to it for a long time, and have
been employing haredi staff to prevent it. 

Yiddish is also used for crowd control at demonstrations:  it allows the
organizers to run the show without being understood by the onlookers and/or
authorities.  A couple of years ago there was a big flap in upstate N.Y.  over
a local "constable" in a haredi community who was supposed to have been
helping the police keep a demonstration under control, who was making markedly
different announcements in Yiddish and English. 

Of course, any language spoken by only some of the people, some of the time,
can be used to keep secrets from those who don't speak it.  I don't know of
any specifically political or military cases, unless what I mentioned above
qualifies;  I think it's much more commonly used in business and other
day-to-day contact betwenn yiiden and goyim. 

Eliyahu Juni

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 1998 13:46:17 EST
From: Lfridhan <Lfridhan@aol.com>
Subject: Iz benkshaft shedlekh?

[English follows]
Leyenendik Shaya Mitelman's fonetishe shures (7.157, 5) dos ershte mol hob ikh
zey vintsik vos farshtanen.  Nor ven ikh hob zey geleyent nokhamol hob ikh zey
geleyent hoykh af a kol un zikh tsugehert mit kop.  Nu, hobn zey mir
tsurikgebrakht in zikorn di reyd fun Kesheniver lantslayt.  A mekhaye. 

Ken dos zayn benkshaft?  Efsher yo.  Di lingvistishe meyvinim ober hobn faynt,
bashaymperlekh, dos vos me redt aroys af English, _nostalgia_, oder af yidish
azamin benkshaft.  Far lingvistishe forshungen iz dos, bashaymperlekh, sam-
hamoves.  Ober me darf nisht hobn keyn moyre.  Me ken zikh bashitsn mit
distsiplin.

Far visnshaftlekhn progres, zeyt oys, darf men amol tsenemen a loshn un
batrakhtn di shtikelekh bazunder.  Me darf amol, zeyt oys, aroystraybn
mentshlekhe gefiln ven me iz arayngetift in visnshaftlekhe forshungen.  Un fun
dos makht men a leybn?  Dafke yo, fun zeyer a nutslekher arbet.  Me darf makhn
a leybn, ober me darf oykh leybn a leybn.  A loshn leybt nit az me batrakht
nor di shtikelekh.  Far der yidisher literatur nutst a guter shrayber dos
zelbe loshn un brengt undz a rirevdike zakh, a bild, a gefil.  Bekitser,
leybn.  Mendele farnemt beyde temes: literatur un loshn. 

S'iz mir arayngefloygn in kop dos bavuste lid: _a khazn oyf shabes_ vi azoy me
shildert epes loytn fakh funem moler, funem eygenem kukvinkl.  A shnayder, a
balegole, a shuster hobn gemolt vi a khazn zingt.  Farn shnayder iz es geven
azoy sheyn un fayn un kuntsik vi a shnayder git a shtokh mit a nodl.  Farn
balegole vi a knak mit a baytsh.  Farn shuster vi a zets mit a hamer.  Iz take
nisht keyn khidesh az af Mendele, yeder eyner fun di spetsialistn zeyt Mendele
funem eygenem kukvinkl.  Ober me darf amol batrakhtn Mendele af breytere
yesoydes. 

Subject: Is nostalgia harmul?  

Reading Shaya Mitelman's phonetic lines (7.157, 5) the first time, I hardly
understood them.  However, when I read them again I read them aloud and
listened carefully.  Well they brought back memories of people from Kishinev. 
A pleasure.

Is this nostalgia?  Perhaps.  Linguists don't respect nostalgia, it seems. 
For some linguistic research this seems to be deadly poison.  But there is no
reason to fear it.  One defends against it with discipline. 

It seems that for scientific progress, one must sometimes take apart a
language and examine each part individually.  It seems that one must drive
out, at times, human feeling when deeply involved in scientific research.  And
from this you can make a living?  Actually, yes, from a very useful
enterprise.  One must make a living, but one must also live a life.  A
language is not alive when seen only piece by piece.  A good writer uses the
same language for literature and brings us something moving, a picture, a
feeling.  In short, life.  Mendele incorporates both literature and language. 

That well-known Yiddish song, a cantor for the Sabbath, popped into my head. 
It is about how each one judging a cantor describes the singing in the
language of his own specialty.  A tailor, a drayman and a shoemaker described
the singing.  For the tailor, it was as lovely, fine and artistic as a tailor
wielding a needle.  For the drayman, like the crack of a whip.  For the
shoemaker, like the whack of a hammer.  It is really no wonder that on
Mendele, each specialist sees Mendele from an individual viewpoint.  However,
sometimes Mendele must be seen on broader foundations. 

Louis Fridhandler
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 07.160

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html






