
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 7.068
September 29, 1997

1) Fisnogi (Mikhoyel Basherives)
2) More on The International (Sholem Yafe)
3) "Zug Es Mir Nukhamol" (Milt Eisner)
4) song about Botvin (Chana and Yosl Mlotek)
5) YIVO's signature (Ron Robboy)
6) A shenereh un besereh velt (Maynard Wishner)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 27 Sep 1997 21:30:49 -0700
From: Mikhoyel Basherives <mikhoyel@nbn.com>
Subject: Fisnogi

Fisnogi, p'tsha, farkilte fis... vos es zol nit zayn! Fishl's
description matches to a "T" the dish I know and though I am also
originally from Fishl's chicken farming town I didn't eat it til Miami
as a kid where it was called "gegliverte fis" by my hosts originally
from Zhelekhov, Poland... delicious whatever its name...

Mikhoyel Basherives

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 28 Sep 1997 03:13:41 -0400 (EDT)
From: LakeJaffe@aol.com
Subject: More on The International

Since a number of Mendelyaner have shown interest in the various versions of
The International in Yiddish, I submit the following two, which differ in
various ways from those already presented.

1. From "Mit Gezang Tsum Kamf", by Jacob Schaeffer, published by the
International Workers Order in 1932.

a. The words in Latin letters exactly as they appear under the musical notes:

Shteit of ir a-le ver vi shkla-f'n  in hun-ger leb'n muz in noit,
Der gaist er kocht er ruft tzu va-f'n, in shlacht unz fi-r'n iz-er
greit__ di velt fun g'val-ta-t'n un - lai - d'n tze-shte-r'n ve-
l'n mir un dan--  fun frai-hait glaich-hait a gan-ei-d'n, Ba-sha-f'nvet der
arbet man -  dos vet zain shoin der letz-ter
un ant-shi-de-ner shtrait, mit dem in-ter-na-tzio-nal,. Shteit
of ir ar-bet-lait, -- dos vet zain shoin der letzter un ant-shi
de-ner shtrait  mit dem in - ter-na-tzio - nal, --Shteit of ir
ar-bet lait.

b. The words in Yiddish letters as they appear elsewhere in the book. (I have
changed them to Latin letters as required for E-mail.)

Shteyt oyf, ir ale ver vi shklafn
In hunger lebn, muz un noyt!
Der gayst -- er kokht, er ruft tsum vafn,
In shlakht unz firn iz er greyt.
Di velt fun gvalt-tatn un laydn,
Tseshtern veln mir un dan-
Fun frayhayt, glaykhheit a gan eydn
Bashafn vet der arbetman.
Dos vet zayn shoyn der letster
Unantshidener shtrayt,
Mit dem internatsional,
Shteyt oyf ir arbetlayt!

Der arbetman vet zayn mamshole
Farshpreytn af der gantser erd
Un parazitn di mapole
Bakumen veln fun zayn shverd.
Arop dem yokh, genug gelitn,
Genug fargosn blut un shveys,
Se blozt dos fayer, lomir shmidn
Kolzman dos ayzn iz nokh heys
Dos vet zayn shoyn der letster (un azoy vayter)

2. From "Zing a Lid", compiled by Albert Biter, cover design by Ben Yomen,
published in New York in 1940.  

a. The words in Latin letters as they appear under the musical notes.

Shteit oif ir ale ver vi shklafn in hunger lebn muz un noit
Der gaist er kocht er ruft tzum vafn ,  in shlacht unz firn iz 
er greit.  Di velt fun gvaldtatn un laidn tzeshtern veln mir un 
dan, fun fraihait  glaichhait a ganeidn bashafn vet der arbet man.
Dos iz shoin unzer letzter unantshidener shtrait.  Mit dem 
internatzional shteit of ir arbet lait.
Dos iz shoin unzer letzter unantshidener shtrait.  Mit dem 
internatzional shteit of ir arbet lait.
Di velt fun gvald tatn un laidn tzeshtern veln mir un dan, 
Fun frai-hait glaich

b. The words as they appear in Yiddish, changed to Latin letters as required
for E-mail.

Shteyt oyf ir ale ver vi shklafn,
In hunger, lebn, muz un noyt.
Der gayst, er kokht;  er ruft tsum vafn
In shlakht undz firn iz er greyt.
Di velt fun gvaldtatn un laydn,
Tseshtern veln mir un dan, 
Fun frayhayt, glaykhayt a ganeydn, 
Bashafn vet der arbetsman.

Dos iz shoyn der letster 
Un antshidener shtrayt,
Mit dem internatsional
Shteyt oyf ir arbetslayt.

Sholem Yafe

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 28 Sep 1997 08:39:33 -0400
From: "Milt Eisner" <eisner@erols.com>
Subject: "Zug Es Mir Nukhamol"

In reply to Alexander Maxwell, "Zug Es Mir Nukhamol" is in "Great Songs of
the Yiddish Theater."  The words are:

Ven ikh zol zikh nor oystoygn,
gefinen kheyn in dayne oygn,
volt di gantse velt geven shoyn mayn.
Ikh volt gezungen di "Hatikve,"
zikh getoyvlt in der mikve,
abi du zolst mit mir in eynem zayn.
Ikh volt gemakht a masematn,
a knecht gevorn bay dayn tatn,
vi Yankev is bay Lovenen geven.
Ikh volt gelitn ale aymes,
un gemolkn di beheymes,
abi ikh zol dir shtendik kenen zen.

Du gefelst dokh ayedn glaykh,
ver es kukt nor oyf dir.
Un du host gefunen kheyn a sakh,
in di oygn yetst bay mir.

Zog es mir nokh a mol, oy, zog es mir nokh a mol.
Vayl ikh bin gern tsu hern di sheyne verter fun dir.
Zog es mir nokh a mol, oy, zog es mir nokh a mol,
Vayl dayne reydn brengt freydn un git mut on a shir.
Mayn harts, es vakst in mir atsindert fun groys freyd.
Az ikh hob derlebt tsu hern fun dir azelkhe reyd.
Zog es mir nokh a mol, oy, zog es mir nokh a mol,
oy, n'khomele, n'shomele, zog es mir nokh a mol.

Milt Eisner

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 28 Sep 1997 11:30:15 -0400 (EDT)
From: EMlotek@aol.com
Subject: song about Botvin 

There was a song about Naftoli Botvin that we published in the "Perl fun der
yidisher poezye" on August l, l982.  This song we had transcribed from the
Ben Stonehill taped collection at YIVO.  

A lid vegn Naftoli Botvin hobn mir gedrukt in undzer kolum "Perl fun der
yidisher poezye" vos iz geven rekordirt in der Ben Stonehill arkhiv vos
gefint zikh in yivo.  Mir hobn dortn geshribn:

"Haynt drukn mir a lid vegn Naftoli Botvin, dem yungn yidishn komunist fun
Lemberg, vos hot in yor l925 geshosn a provokator Yuzef Tsekhnovski un er iz
derfar farmishpet gevorn fun a poylish gerikht tsum toyt.  Der toyt-urteyl iz
oysgefirt gevorn dem 6tn oygust,l925.  Er hot zikh opgezogt tsu betn
bagnedikung baym prezident un zikh nisht gelozt farbindn di oygn beys der
ekzekutsye.

Ot iz dos lid, vi mir hobn es aropgeshribn fun der tashme:

Botvin iz akhtsn yor alt gevorn,
An onteyl nemt er in di kompartey,
Tsu tsvantsik yor vert er arestirt
In di shuts fun di vayse politsey.

Botvin iz bald gevoyr gevorn,
Az der provekator darf adurkhtsugeyn,
Aroysgenumen hot er dem revolver
Un shist im glaykh in harts arayn.

Der provokator iz gefaln a toyter,
Botvin iz mutik geblibn shteyn,
S'hot dokh gornisht lang gedoyert,
Er iz shoyn bay der vayser politsey.

Botvin iz on shrek un on eyme,
Men firt im in gerikht arayn,
Ober Botvin hot dokh nit keyn moyre,
Er zingt dem "internatsyonal".

Veynt nit brider, veynt nit shvester,
Veynt nit ale - - - (nit klor),
Az es falt a korbn, falt nit keyner,
Nor es falt der bester.

Di letste strofe vert gezungen mit der melodye fun lid "Borekh Shulman," a
mitglid fun der poylisher sotsyalistisher partey P.P.S., velkher hot dem ltn
may l905 gevorfn a bombe oyfn gehilf-politsey-komisar Konstantinov in Varshe
un im derharget.  Di verter fun der letster strofe funem lid vegn Borukh
Shulman zaynen:

Veynt nit shvester, veynt nit, brider,
Troyert nisht, muter, nokh ayer kind.
Az es falt, falt der bester,
Der vos hot nor getray gedint.

Chana and Yosl Mlotek 

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 28 Sep 1997 11:06:42 -0700
From: rrobboy@cts.com (Ron Robboy)
Subject: YIVO's signature

Miriam Issacs (7.065.4) was saddened, even indignant, to see the signature
of Tom Freudenheim, new Executive Director of YIVO, appearing upside down
in a fund-raising letter.  The recent appointment of Freudenheim, a
professional and capable museum administrator but with scant background in
Yiddish, as I recall, had been cause for concern among some observers.  If,
however, he is able to write even this well upside down, I would say he is
far more talented than advertised!

Surely, no one can believe that Freudenheim actually did sign it that way,
but it would be interesting to learn exactly how it did happen.  For offset
printing, when more than one color appears, a color separation is
necessary, with different plates being photographically produced for each
color ink.  The entire run then passes through the press as many times as
there are colors, with the plate and corresponding ink color changing each
time.  Freudenheim's signature, appearing in blue, could have been inverted
by a printer -- the human being who operates a printing press, not a
"peripheral," as computer components are called -- somewhere in that
process.  Or it could have happened on a computer screen by a careless
layout artist inserting the Executive Director's "signature," which might
exist as a graphic file on a disk.  The inescapable implication, however,
is that the gaffe must have been overlooked by both the printer as well as
the white-collar worker with responsibility for the mailer.  A generation
ago, individuals in both those capacities would have been fluent readers of
Yiddish.  Whatever the cause, and regardless of whether there is any blame
to affix, the anomaly does point to an inevitable evolution of the social
and institutional structure of YIVO.

Hugh Denman (7.046.4) raised a related issue speaking of the out-sourcing
of YIVO's publications to the Arbeter Ring Book Service.  The days are long
gone, I suspect, of YIVO's being overseen vertically by a cadre of Yiddish
scholars who make institutional policy, run the library, organize the fund
raising, and write the monographs.  Just as in the corporate world, the
tasks of the institution, like those of any large not-for-profit research
or cultural organization, have been spread out among professionals with
expertise, we hope, in their particular areas.  (If the corporate analogy
seems far-fetched, consider for a moment the imminent merger YIVO is
dancing around.)  For some tasks, it is no longer seen as efficient to
maintain in-house departments.  Fund raising and marketing, in particular,
are susceptible to this tide, and outside consultants often do much of the
work.  There are, I am told by a knowledgeable acquaintance, even
consultants who specialize in writing just such letters as Freudenheim
signed, and they do so for dozens of different clients.  YIVO, in other
words, is no longer an amateur affair.  I mean no derogation by amateur,
but rather in the sense of one who loves what they are doing and would
continue doing it regardless of whether funding or a job or an institution
were there to support their obsession.  There certainly still remain such
dedicated Yiddishists and researchers associated with YIVO, but the shape
and future of the institution no longer remain exclusively in their hands.

In an environment such as that, there is no way of knowing who decided even
on the content, much less the style, of Freudenheim's letter.  While the
upside-down signature suggests that whoever signed off (so to speak) on the
finished mailer had little or no experience with hand-written _oysyes_, it
may be that they just had a headache, or been in a rush, or . . . who
knows?  One does wonder, though, if Freudenheim merely wields the
proverbial rubber stamp, with fund raisers really running the show.  If so,
maybe it just got a little disoriented this time.

Reflecting further on the upside-down signature, what I find sad is not its
mere fact, but how many years it's been since a union bug has been seen on
a YIVO document or publication.  Looking at what I have on hand, I see that
the 1978 YIVO Annual of Jewish Social Science does indeed still carry a
union label.  By the 1983 edition, it was gone.  Using shackled air
controllers as an example, it didn't take Reagan long to change the way
business was done in America, did it?  Of course, in the era of desktop
publishing, financial pressures increasingly dictate that  "independent
contractors" -- i.e., without benefits or pensions -- do the typesetting
and layout for something as simple as a fund-raising letter.  Besides, a
union label would no longer guarantee that whoever was setting a Yiddish
text had any idea of what they were doing, as it once would have.

I also have on hand a much earlier YIVO volume, from 1946, one certainly
carrying a union bug.  In Max Weinreich's Introduction to it, he explains
that this volume represents the first of the  _Perzenlekhe dokumentn_, a
series long-delayed by the vicissitudes of war and attendant change of
continent.  The collection of autobiographical data had been among YIVO's
earliest projects, both because of what they told of the lives of
individual Jews, Weinreich wrote, and what they told of the greater society
around them.  This first such published document was written by Shmuel
Sheynfeld (Samuel Schoenfeld), a Jew who had emigrated to America from
Odessa in 1891.  It describes his traditional education midst the winds of
change in the old country, the drama of emigration, and how the cultural
forces in and outside the Yiddish-speaking communities of New York City
shaped his life.  The core of the book concerns itself with his involvement
in the trade union movement.  Who exactly was Shmuel Sheynfeld, and what
does he call his life story?  The book is _Zikhroynes fun a shriftzetser_
(Memoirs of a compositor).  The man was a typesetter.  His life was devoted
to preparing the Yiddish word for publication; insuring that those engaged
in that work were qualified and competent; and struggling to maintain
institutional recognition and compensation for that competence.  Just as
the book's content is offered as an epitome of the Diaspora experience, the
document itself and the pride with which it was chosen to finally initiate
the series epitomized YIVO's concerns and intellectual direction.  No less
than a personal document, it was offered as a portrait of the institution
itself.

Times change.

Ron Robboy

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 28 Sep 1997 14:57:06 -0500 
From: mwishner@jon.cjfny.org
Subject: A shenereh un besereh velt

Thanks to Elye Palevsky for linking "A shenereh un besereh velt" with "Tikun
Olam". Since the latter precedes the former by a millenia or two...perhaps
that is what we were doing all the time...but didn't always know it.

Maynard Wishner
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 7.068




