
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.049
January 11, 2000

1) Abraham Brumberg's response (Allan Nadler)
2) in a gevisn zin (elye palevsky)
3) Ramblings on the Yiddish-in-Israel Thread (Bob Wilson)
4) Yosl Cutler (Edward Portnoy)
5) "pisem veramses" (Jack Berger)
6) "pisem veramses" (Herman Taube)
7) "pisem veramses" (Hugh Denman)
8) kolonial, Tsukunft, pisem veramses (itsik shteyn)
9) post-doctoral fellowships in Modern Israel Studies (Bernard Cooperman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 15:45:14 -0500 (EST)
From: Allan Nadler <anadler@drew.edu>
Subject: Abraham Brumberg's response (09.045)

First, I'm glad Mr. Brumberg was able to get such comedic mileage from my
typo (i.e. Blumberg), and I apologize for my error. But to be serious, his
latest salvo only confirms Brumberg's insistence on dismissing the value and
significance of Haredi Yiddish. So, the book I mentioned -- one of many
being published in the Haredi world that can be found in the Yiddish
sections of mokhrei sforim (bookstores) throughout the Haredi world -- is
dismissed as being of "obscure origins." As opposed, I guess, to the
non-obscure nature of secular Yiddish publications like Yiddisher Kempfer
and Di Zukunft which one can find at the local seven-eleven and in the
window-display of Barnes and Noble? Brumberg will not grant haredi Yiddish
writers any quarter or legitimacy, ostensibly since the quality of their
work does not approach that of Peretz or Singer. As opposed to whom exactly:
the many contemporary secular Yiddish writers whose work IS of that quality
? He complains that the Haredim don't pay attention to the secular Yiddish
literary canon. And they might well complain that Brumberg does not pay much
attention to Tilim, Mishnayos, Gemoro and Shulken Orukh.  The very literary
sources out of which the Yiddish derekh ha-shas, celebrated by Weinreich,
emerged, is virutally unknown in the secular Yiddishist world of today. That
world will consequently never be capable of producing such works as Singer's
Sotn in Goray or Grades' Tsemakh Atlas or Opotashu's In Poilishe Velder,
etc. But writers who will emerge out of the Haredi community just might. In
fact, they are the only hope for a future Yiddish literature of such
quality, since at least they have the cultural background and Jewish
vocabulary to read and appreciate the earlier classics.

Of course, the primary literature for the haredim is in loshn-koydesh. But
their quotidian language is Yiddish, and they have a growing body of Yiddish
journals, newspapers and books that, to them, is not obscure at all. On my
most recent anthropological foray into Borough Park, I discovered yet
another Yiddish weekly -- only nine weeks old -- Der Blat, which contained
more than one hundred "bletter", i.e. about five times the average size of
the last surviving secular Yiddish weekly in America. That makes six vibrant
Haredi Yiddish-language weeklies, all of which are enjoying a rapidly
growing readership. We keep dismissing and disdaining this literature only
to our own impoverishment.

Allan Nadler
Madison, NJ

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1999 12:10:54 -0500 (EST)
From: EPalevsky1@aol.com
Subject: in a gevisn zin

kh'ruf zikh op af dem khaver katz' bikoshe - in response to B. Katz' request
(09.048) I offer the following translation of the phrase in question:

" In a sense, the very act of the translation into Yiddish was in itself a
symbol of continuity,  of cultural connectedness, as though one were thereby
returning a favor to someone to whom one was much obliged."

Indeed the evolving culture in Hebrew of a renewed Israel was much obliged to
the culture in Yiddish of these story-telling  "arbetorins"

elye palevsky

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1999 23:02:35 -0500 (EST)
From: "Bob Wilson" <gandalf@ballistic.com>
Subject: Ramblings on the Yiddish-in-Israel Thread

I have lurked on Mendele for years now and break silence with nothing very
important to say.  Mechl Asheri's commonsensical remarks about the status of
Yiddish in Israel captured what I had experienced in two and a half years of
being an oleh hadash in the mid 1980's, before I became a yored hadash.  I
watched with dismay as my five-year-old son Seth became my best Hebrew
dictionary and translator, and after about a year there I became painfully
aware that one of the main reasons I was not becoming really competent in
Hebrew was that I could speak Yiddish with impunity and be understood by
most everybody around.  I had R Asheri's experience, this time in an AA
meeting of all places, where I was trying to express some pretty abstract
thoughts with some primitive Hebrew tools, and they said "Redt Yiddish!" and
it worked just fine.  I was sponsoring a recovering heroin addict in his
twenties -- Yiddish was our best common language -- and we had this
wonderful animated talk on the No. 25 bus going across Tel-Aviv where he
told me at full volume how he and this "Teymanishe meydl" had stolen a pound
of gold and run away to Germany, and how the police had marched them into
the courtroom handcuffed together and there stood his wife....  Hevra, this
is not the behavior of a dying language.

Just a few remarks about secular Yiddish and Ladino -- I am a linguist and
have some observations to make about them.  I spent some time in Istanbul
and Izmir and in the islands in the Marmara Sea, speaking Hebrew with the
men and Ladino with the women (they spoke Ladino and I spoke my Texas
Spanish with all the adjustments I could manage on the fly).  And don't fuss
at me for calling it Ladino.  You know what I'm talking about.  And I found
a lot more Yiddish there than you could imagine.  A couple in their
seventies invited me to their home and we began to talk.  I told the
gentleman where I thought he was from -- galitz-somewhere -- and he drew
himself up and said proudly "Ikh bin geboyren gevorn un ufgelebt in
Istanbul."  He and his wife had finished middle school in Yiddish medium in
Istanbul.

Anyway, there was a difference between Yiddish and Ladino that I observed in
Israel and in Turkey as well, which intrigued me and which I have not heard
discussed.  It is easy to find fluent Yiddish speakers in their twenties in
Israel, and Yiddish-speaking families in Turkey seemed to pass the language
on as well.  More so than with Ladino.  The pattern with Ladino was like
this:  Grandparents -- sixties/seventies -- spoke Ladino fluently, reported
that they dreamed in it and when they did calculations out loud, it was in
Ladino numbers.  Their grammar preserved adjective-noun agreement,
ser/estar/hay distinctions and irregular verb forms, honorifics, unchanged
over centuries.  The same was true of Yiddish-speaking grandparents.  With
the parents generation in their forties the pattern began to change some.
The Ladino speakers were pretty fluent, used Ladino to speak to the old
folks but were at least as comfortable in Turkish or Hebrew as the case
might be, and their grammar was very conservative.  Yiddish speakers of the
same generation were at least as fluent but the grammar showed
deterioration, creolization almost, in a lot of aspects.

With young people the difference was pronounced, and you may take me to task
if you think I am mistaken about all this.  Both Yiddish and Ladino speakers
had perfect passive understanding of what was being said by the old folks.
But in the case of Ladino, when I would interview a young person either in
Israel or in Turkey, they would seldom get through a whole sentence without
a pause to search for a word or a way to put things.  And the grammar was
conservative, verb forms were historically correct and adjective/noun or
subject/verb agreement were intact.  Even items with counterintuitive gender
like "el agua" or "la mano" were kept straight.  With the young Yiddish
speakers exactly the reverse was true.  They were all very fluent and showed
no discomfort with their language being grammatically as different from
their grandparents' Yiddish as modern English is from Shakespeare's English.
Gender/agreement, honorifics, hobn/zayn verbs, all out the window.  "Di
girets" means "You said."

I have a lot of thoughts about the difference in the way those two
populations lived through the past century, in connection with their very
different styles of language preservation and evolution, but I had rather
hear your thoughts about all that.

Mit bestn,

Bob Wilson
Arp Texas

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 10:51:30 -0500 (EST)
From: noy@panix.com
Subject: Yosl Cutler

I wrote my M.A. thesis on Yosl Cutler and his artistic partner Zuni Maud.
Though I initially responded directly to Marti Krow-Lucal, I suppose I
should share the information with the rest of the khevre. If anyone is
interested in their Modicut puppet theater, there is an article on it in the
most recent issue of The Drama Review (TDR), [Modicut Puppet Theatre:
Modernism, satire and Yiddish culture, TDR, 43:(3), 115-134, Fall 1999]

Yosl Cutler:

Born in 1896 in Troyanets, Volin, his father was a butcher. He went to
kheyder, but did not receive any further education. This was a result of the
death of his father at an early age, poverty and the fact that he was not
inclined to religious study. However, he showed great interest in drawing as
a child. At age eleven, he was sent to relatives in Zhitomir who, upon the
advice of a drunken attorney in their tavern, apprenticed Cutler to a sign
painter in Berditshev.  In 1911, he left for America with an older brother.
He spent a year in New York, but then left for Athens, Georgia, where he had
an uncle. Cutler worked as a signpainter in Athens for a few years, but
apparently became bored by the provincial nature of the town. After painting
a large pig on his uncle's truck one night, he made his way north to New
York.  Once in New York, he studied for a short time at the National Academy
of Art and the Educational Alliance.  He also worked for a short period in
the Painters Club of Philadelphia. Mainly, however, he worked in a large
sign factory from 1913-1921.  In 1918, Cutler was remanded for refusing to
serve in the army during World War One, as he "didn't want to kill anybody."
He was later freed as it was found that he was not an American citizen at
the time.  During the summer of 1921, with the help of his friend and fellow
artist Morris Pass, he found work as a waiter in Moyshe Nadir's summer
resort. It was there that he first encountered writers discussing literature
and reading their works together. He took to the idea of writing and wrote a
short poem which Nadir enjoyed. Happy with the response, Cutler wrote more
poems that summer, together with illustrations which, he discovered, made
him a popular figure in the literary cafes upon returning to New York. This
material was simply circulated among the writers and it was not until the
following year that Cutler's first story appeared in print. This was "Di
falshe velt geshikhte," which was accompanied by a note from Nadir extolling
the young writer's work.  Following that, Cutler contributed his work to
Otem, Feder, Der groyser kundes, Kinderzhurnal and Morgn frayhayt, usually
accompanied by his illustrations. Cutler also illustrated dozens of books of
prose and poetry, most notably Moyshe Leyb Halpern's "Di goldene pave,"
among others. In 1934 he published a book entitled "Muntergang," much of
which had previously been published in the Morgn frayhayt, along with new
material and numerous illustrations.

In 1923, Cutler, together with fellow artist Zuni Maud opened a studio from
which they sold small works of art and painted furniture. In 1924, Cutler
travelled to Europe as the set designer for Morris Schwartz's Yiddish Art
Theater. Returning in 1925, Schwartz hired Cutler and Maud to create the
sets for a new production of Goldfaden's Di kishefmakherin. Schwartz also
had them fashion puppets for a particular scene, though decided not to use
them. Cutler and Maud, however, began to play with the puppets, bringing
them to parties and to the literary cafes they frequented. It was suggested
that they found a Yiddish puppet theater, which they did by year's end.
Their Modicut theater opened in December 1925 and lasted until 1933. They
wrote and performed original works and plays created for them by writers
such as Moyshe Nadir. Most of their texts were cultural and political
satires. Enormously popular, they performed nine sold out shows per week
before touring Jewish communities in the US and Canada in 1927 and 1928. In
the fall of 1929, they toured Europe, playing in England, France, Belgium
and Poland to critical and popular acclaim. Following their tour in Poland
(they performed 200 sold out shows at the Literatn fareyn), a Modicut fan
club was created in Warsaw and a puppet theater called "Maydim"  was founded
in Vilna. During the winter of 1931-32, they toured the Soviet Union, also
to great acclaim. For reasons unknown, they disbanded their theater in 1933.
Both Cutler and Maud continued to perform puppet theater on their own and
with different partners, but without the great success that they had
together.

In early 1935, Cutler made a short film comprised of three puppet skits in
preparation for an attempt to make a full length film of his version of
Modicut's parody of Sh. Ansky's Der dibek. On the way to California, where
the film was to be made, Cutler performed in various midwestern cities on a
tour organized by the Morgn Frayhayt. While traveling from Minneapolis to
Denver on June 11, his car was struck in Iowa Falls, Iowa, and he was
killed. According to press estimates, between ten and fifteen thousand
people walked in his funeral procession, testament to the joy he brought to
the Jews of the Lower East Side with his art, stories and puppet theater.

Edward Portnoy

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 10:48:59 -0500 (EST)
From: Jack Berger <jack.berger@citicorp.com>
Subject: "pisem veramses"

It sounds to me like a Yiddish/Ashkenazic pronunciation of the two
Egyptian cities 'Pithom and Rameses' referenced at the beginning of the
Book of Exodus, which were built by Jewish slaves under Pharaoh.

Regards
Jack Berger

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 10:51:32 -0500 (EST)
From: HTaube218@aol.com
Subject: Pisom Ve'Ramses

Olek Mincer is asking for the exact meaning of the words:  "pisom veramses"
(09.045). Pisom and Rames were to cities built by the Jews in slavery in
Egypt.

You will find the names of the two cities in the Bible, in the book of
Exodus, Chapter I, p.11 :
        "Therefore they did set over them taskmasters
          to afflict them with their burdens. And they built
          for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses."
          (" Hobn zai gemacht iber im tzinzharn, kedai im
           tzu painikn mit zaire lastarbet, un er hot geboit
           shpaichler shtet far Pahroh'n, Pisom un Ramses".

The city was named after one of the 12 Egypian pharahos, of whom Ramesses II
(c. 1301-1234 B.C.) was the most famous.  Many scholars think that he was
the pharaoh of the Exodus.  Pison was a city built near the Pis(h)on River.

Good Luck and Happy Chanukah!
Herman Taube

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 11:05:53 -0500 (EST)
From: Hugh Denman <h.denman@ucl.ac.uk>
Subject: pisem veramses

With reference to Olek Mincer's query [09.045:7] re 'pisem veramses' as
mentioned in I.B. Singer's 'Mayse Tishevits', the phrase connotes the
cities of Pithom and Raamses in ancient Egypt referred to in Exodus 1:11
and stands by analogy for any gradiose buildings. 'Mayse tishevits' was
first published in _Forverts_ on 29 March 1959. I'm afraid I don't have the
page number to hand. It was subsequently collected in _Gimpl tam un andere
dertseylungen_, NY: Tsiko Bikher Farlag, 1963, 237-47. The English
translation, 'The Last Demon' (tr. Martha Glicklich and Cecil Hemley), was
first collected in _Short Friday and Other Stories_, NY: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1964, 145-58.

Hugh Denman
London, England

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 11:48:28 -0500 (EST)
From: shteyn@juno.com
Subject: kolonial, Tsukunft, pisem veramses

khosheve mendelianer,

1) freynd j. levitow vil yisen vos meynt kolonial. bej uns in bukovina
fleygt men unrufn"kolonial"a gevelb fun produktn, a grocery store, vu
unter andere skhojres, flejgt men farkojfn ojkh limenes, tejtlen,
marantsn, tej und andere importirte skhojres, dos rov fun demoltige
kolonies.

2) di tsukunft is a yiddisher kvartalnik (a journal vos dershajnt
ejnmol in drej khadoshim) un zajn adres is:Zukunft 25 East21st Street,
NEW YORK, NY 10010, tel(212)505-8040. nit lang is arojs a dopelter numer
far 1999, gevidmet sholom alejkhem.

3) pisem veramses sajnen di "shpajkhlershtet far par'en" (lojt
jehoesh), velkhe di yidn in mitsrajim hobn gemuzt bojen (shmos,
1-11). vert banutst vi a metafor far shverer, umnutslekher arbet.

kol tuv,
itsik shteyn

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1999 21:41:18 -0500 (EST)
From: bc40@umail.umd.edu (Bernard Cooperman)
Subject: post-doctoral fellowships in Modern Israel Studies

THE JOSEPH AND REBECCA MEYERHOFF CENTER FOR JEWISH STUDIES
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND COLLEGE PARK
Announces an on-going series of POST-DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIPS

The Meyerhoff Center seeks to appoint two post-doctoral fellows in the
various fields of Modern Israel Studies for the academic year 2000-2001.
Areas of specialty may include culture broadly defined, literature, film,
sociology, urban studies, anthropology, politics, Zionist history and
thought, and Palestinian and Israeli-Arab studies.  The fellowship is
designed to provide recent Ph.D.s with the opportunity to prepare their
first major academic publication while benefiting from a strong
intellectual community and gaining some teaching experience.  The rich
library and archival resources of the area-including the Library of
Congress, National Archives, and National Library of Medicine-make the
University of Maryland an especially attractive place for academic
research.

The Fellowship provides a stipend of $30,000, renewable once, as well as
health benefits.  The Center will help pay moving costs to Maryland and
will provide travel funds to participate in academic conferences.  Fellows
will be provided with office space and a computer.

Fellows will be expected to teach one course in their area of
specialization during the spring semester, 2001.

To Apply, please send:
letter of application, describing field, research interests, and dissertation
graduate school transcript
two letters of recommendation, one of which must be from the major advisor
reports about teaching experience

Send Application to:
 Dr. Marsha Rozenblit, Director
 Meyerhoff Center for Jewish Studies
 0113 Woods Hall
 University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

For best consideration, please submit applications by March 17, 2000

Bernard D. Cooperman,
College Park MD
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.049

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html





