
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.042
August 13, 1998

1) "folks-froi" (Jon Levitow)
2) On Birds and Flowers (Mikhl Herzog)
3) cross-language ambiguous sentences (David Sherman) [Moderator's note]
4) Nakhum/Nokhum/Nukhem (Beni Warshawsky)
5) rebe Peter (Peter Kluehs)
6) shvartse muzik (Norbert Reinhartz)
7) Yiddish in Israel (Yosef Gilboa)
8) yidish un yidishkayt (sylvia schildt)
9) etlekhe protim (sylvia schildt)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 19:12:51 -0400 (EDT)
From: JLevitow@aol.com
Subject: "folks-froi"

Teyere Mendelyanskis,
    
A grus far ale.  There don't seem to be tsu fil machaloykes (too many
arguments) raging at the moment, so I thought I'd jump in with a couple
questions.  I wish I had some new pieces of information to trade, but I
don't, so what to do?  All are welcome to e-mail me directly. 

a)  We have a brivele written in Yiddish by our Bube to her descendants about
her early days in Ostrolenka, Poland, which she left in 1922.  In it she
describes her mother, saying she was a "folks-froi" -- semi-colon -- "zi hot
gevust a zach vegn doktorye un men hot zich tsu ir gevendt in fal krankheit." 
(She knew a lot about medicine, and people turned to her when they were
sick.)  She goes on in the paragraph to describe how the children were kept
up at night to help with all this doctoring.  The father by the way was a
Vurker Hasid.  The kashye is, what might the expression "folks-froi" signify,
precisely?  Is it equivalent to, "proste yidne," i.e., a simple or uneducated
person?  The context suggests on the contrary that this was a woman who knew
something by way of the "folk" tradition, but I wonder, would there have been
a name for such a thing back then? 

b)  Noch a kashye fun ibersetzung (another question about translation): 
Bube's sister fled Ostrolenka and wound up in a Byelorussian town called
Stolin in 1940, and writes in a postcard, "Ich hob meine zachn aroisgenumen
fun paner (faner?) un gevarfen in wasser."  (I took my things out of the pan
(?) and threw them in the water.) Is this an idiom meaning she had lost all
her things?  Again, that's what the context suggests, but I'd like to know
for sure. 

c)  Is anyone out there "bokye" (skilled) at deciphering Yiddish handwriting? 
We have two letters written by a member of this same family circa 1940, but
the handwriting is not legible to me.  The letters are not damaged; they're
just not carefully written.  We could send enlarged copies and would be happy
to provide compensation. 

d)  I would like to find the words to the song, "Ziben Gute Yor" (Seven Good
Years), composed it appears by a person named "Rumszynski." I have it on a
French 2 CD anthology called, "Yiddish -- New York Paris Varsovie 1910-1940,"
sung in Yiddish by Julius Guttman, recorded in Berlin in 1927.  I can't make
much of it out. 

e)  Can anyone suggest an efficient way for me to locate the Ostrolenker
"Yizkor Book?" I am writing to those Ostrolenkers whose addresses we still
have, but I thought someone might have another suggestion.  Any Ostrolenkers
out there, by chance? 

S'iz genug fun mir.  Zu ale a shaynem dank.  

Jon Levitow 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Aug 1998 10:04:28 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Mikhl Herzog" <mherzog@bestweb.net>
Subject: On Birds and Flowers.

Marjorie Schonhaut Hirshan asks about the name _Feygl_. Here's the story,
again, briefly: 

The name _Feygl_ is NOT the Yiddish plural _feygl_ 'birds' (an unlikely name
for a child).  It IS the correspondent of German _Voeglein_ a regional
variant of the flower-name _Veilchen_ 'violet'.  Presto! The girl's name
VIOLET. 

Mikhl Herzog

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 09 Aug 1998 13:20:21 -0400
From: "David M. Sherman" <dmsherman@shaw.wave.ca>
Subject: summer musings: cross-language ambiguous sentences

Living in a home where we use Yiddish with a lot of arayngemisht English
vocabulary with our kids, there are a number of words which could be English
or Yiddish with different meanings. Occasionally one find oneself using
sentences where there's ambiguity depending on whether a vocabulary word is
English or Yiddish. It's fun to list some of these.  Note that our
pronunciation is Polish Yiddish (i.e., "flaysh" instead of "fleysh"). 

"M'kon dikh hern durkh di vent" -- In our (noisy) household, sound travels
through the heating vents between certain rooms. If this sentence is said to
a kid in the basement playroom by someone who is in a particular upstairs
bedroom, <vent> means (English) vent. But if the speaker is in the next room
it means "walls". I know of no way of telling the difference. 

"Vish op dos tayl" -- said to someone who is wiping a spill off the kitchen
floor. Are you asking them to clean this "part" of the floor, or a particular
floor tile? I know no way of telling the difference. 

This one's more whimsical: You toss a crumpled piece of paper towards the
garbage can and it doesn't go in. "Mist!" Are you referring to the garbage,
or saying "[I] missed!"? 

The above are all real-life examples. 

I asked the kids to think of more, and Shoshana came up with "meyl", but it's
a bit contrived to think of a sentence where it's actually ambiguous. I
suppose "Di meyl iz ofn tish in di kekh" would qualify, What's on the table
-- flour or the day's mail? 

Any others? (Note that "nayn" does NOT work in our dialect: if I ask Avraham
oyb er iz akht yor alt and he responds "nayn!", that's "no", while "nahn"
would be 9.) 

David Sherman
Toronto

[Moderator's note: Another interesting example for David's collection -
Yiddish/English homonyms with the similar meaning - can be found in recent
Forward (July 31, 1998). The key refrain of Yosef Kerler's poem "Khezhbn"
(_Khezshbun_ in Forward's transliteration) "Mir zaynen kvit" (= we are even,
_kvit_ is from Russ/Ukr/Pol word for ticket or receipt) translated by Betty
Perlov as "We are quit".     - i.v.]

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 9 Aug 1998 03:23:37 -0400 (EDT)
From: "B&D Warshawsky" <dwarshawsky@earthlink.net>
Subject: Nakhum/Nokhum/Nukhem 

In Michael Shimshoni's disagreement with Yosef Gilboa's explanation of the
transformation of the patakh in the Hebrew name Nakhum to the kometz in the
Yiddish name Nokhum, he tells a very clever story which I enjoyed a great
deal. The story plays with the name Yiddish Nokhum and the verse in Exodus
13,17 "lo nokhom elokim." 

By way of the story, I don't think he is suggesting that the name Nokhum
comes from the word nokhom because it doesn't explain the transformation of
the second kometz in nokhom to a shuruk/milufum in Nokhum. If he is
suggesting that the pronunciation change is due to sloppy speech patterns
then it doesn=92t explain the consistent pronunciation of both the kometz and
shuruk/milufum in Litvisch Yiddish Nokhum and the Poylish Yiddish Nukhem. 

Beni Warshawsky

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 9 Aug 1998 16:51:28 -0400 (EDT)
From: pelokoha@t-online.de (Peter Kluehs)
Subject: rebe Peter

khosheve khaveyrim,

hob ikh zikh gekhidusht un gefreyt oykhet, az a ponim hot amol gelebt a rebe
mitn nomen Peter. ikh tsitir fun der mayse "di makhloykes mitn rambam" vos
gefindt zikh inem mayse-bukh fun 1602: 

rebe Moyshe hot dernokh vayter mamshekh geven un gezogt: "du host oykh nisht
gevolt trinken fun vayn, makhmes mayn meshores heyst Peter un host dir
getrakht, az er iz an orl un derfar iz der vayn yayen-nesekh.  vil ikh ober,
du zolst visn, az hagam er heyst Peter, iz er ober a zeltn frumer,
opgehitener yid, vi es iz shver aza eynem tsu gefinen, un heysn heyst er nokh
a godl betoyre". azoy reydndik, hot er oyfge- misht a gemore un im gevizn a
groysn mufleg betoyre, vos hot take geheysn rebe Peter. 

efsher kon emetser bahavnt in gemore mir moydie zayn vegn di biografye funem
dozikn godl betoyre? 

a dank foroys!

Peter Kluehs

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 11 Aug 1998 19:44:10 -0400 (EDT)
From: Norbert Reinhartz <b1phmv50@sympatico.ca>
Subject: shvartse muzik

Dear Mendelyaner,

Yiddishland Cafe of the Workmen's Circle in Toronto is preparing an evening
on the theme "Jewish and black music: from the roots up". We are struggling
with the translation into Yiddish of the term "black music".  "Shvartse
muzic" does not sound right; "negerishe muzik" might not be politically
correct. Any suggestions? 

Henia Reinhartz

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Aug 1998 03:12:32 -0400 (EDT)
From: AJ Gilboa <bfgilboa@weizmann.weizmann.ac.il>
Subject: Yiddish in Israel

David Herskovics wrote about the lack of Hebrew poetry on the Web in his
tirade against the perceived anti-Yiddishism in Israel.

This only proves that one cannot depend on the web for everything!  What
about good old-fashioned books!? There are exceptionally good anthologies of
Hebrew poetry, from biblical to modern, including many examples of medieval
poetry and much much more.  Some of these have benefitted from excellent
translations into English, e.g., an anthology by the late T. Carmi, an
immigrant from North America, himself a modern Hebrew poet. 

As far as I am aware, the Israeli school curriculum is quite even-handed in
selection of our literary heritage. 

One must be aware that, "official" anti-Yiddish pronouncements
notwithstanding, until quite recently (with the advent of
non-Yiddish-speakers into Israeli politics), all important cabinet meetings
were conducted in Yiddish.

I also think you may be missing an important point about Hebrew vs.  Yiddish.
For a nation regathering its fragments from the corners of the earth, the one
language we all have in common is Hebrew - the natural choice for our lingua
franca. This should not preclude ethnic pluralism as regards all aspects of
our mulifaceted cultural roots - language, food, dress, music, etc... as
indeed it does not. Just listen to the babel of tongues in any public place
in Israel and you will understand what I mean. As for the "new Jew" cut off
from his golus past - this misguided ideal has been scrapped long ago along
with the Rock Ivrit movement. I think you are beating a dead horse.

Yosef Gilboa

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Aug 1998 13:45:24 -0400 (EDT)
From: Pcreativa@charm.net (Sylvia Schildt)
Subject: yidish un yidishkayt

Oy, di hartzike verter fun Feygelen un Dovidn bavayzen vider az es brent nokh
a shtarker flam fun yidish un yidishkayt. 

Tzudertzu vil ikh betn az di baamte vos vel firn dem Yidish Klub Konferentz
(in Oygust) in Los Angeles (Fish Kutner un azey vayter) veln informirn zeyere
konferentn, un ikh hof az di khevre veln informirn zeyere mitglider.  Un azey
vet zikh boyen a dringndn koyekh oystzuleyzn dem dozikn problem. 

In dem Spolsky/Shomany Abstrakt shteyt eykh geshribn, un ikh tzitir: 

"The cultural institutes and attaches of the various countries involved also
provide varying amounts of support. " 

Mir, di libhobers fun Yidish in di tfutzes, mir darfn shtitzn Yidish in
Yisroyl - un mit dem vos mir lozn visn di shprakh instantzn in Yisroyl az mir
kukn zikh tzu tzu zeyere shtik, iz dos an aktzie vos iz zeyer k'day. 

We, the lovers of Yiddish in the various coutries outside Israel, must
support Yiddish in Israel. And by letting the appropriate language entities
in Israel know that we are on the watch, we are performing an appropriate
act. 

sylvia schildt
baltimore, maryland

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Aug 1998 13:45:23 -0400 (EDT)
From: Pcreativa@charm.net (Sylvia Schildt)
Subject: etlekhe protim

Tayere Mendelyaner:

mayn kompyuter iz haynt ufgeshtanen tkhiyes ha-meysim, nokh 4-5 teg "tzvishn
2 veltn" un ikh hob oysgenutzt dem gelegnheyt oystzuforshn etlekhe vikhtike
protim far di vos viln epes ufton lteyves dem inyen "yidish in yisroyl." 

di ershte un dringnste frage iz -- ver iz der minister vos hot di makht iber
dertziyung ? -- ta-da! 

ikh hob ongeklungen in yisroyl ambasade in vashington un ot iz zeyer entfer:

der minister fun dertziyung, kultur un sport iz:

Yitchak Levy
Minister of Education, Culture & Sport
34 Shivtei Israel
Jerusalem Israel 91911     Phone:  972-2-560-222    Fax: 972-2-560-2752
url:  www.education.gov.il

Di froy mitn amt fun Inspectorke fun Yidish Limud is Vered Koppel.  (Agev, zi
hot gezolt onteyl nemen in veltrat konferentz, nor zi hot nit gekent bayzayn
vayl zi hot ersht geboyrn a kind.) 

Ikh hob gefunen zeyer a vikhtik abstrakt fun Bernard Spolsky un Elana Shohamy
untern nomen "National Profiles of Languages in Education: Israel:  Language
Policy. Es iz k'day dos durkhtzuleyenen in gantzn. Deb veb-adres iz: 
www.biu.ac.il/hu/prcmult.htm

Di 2 shrayber zaynen:
Dr. Bernard Spolsky, Director of Research Staff, Language Policy Research
Center vi eykh Professor, Dept. of English, Bar-Ilan University.
Co-Director:  Elana Shohamy, Schol of Education, Tel Aviv University.

Ikh tzitir etlekhe oystzugn vos hobn a shaykhes tzu undzer inyen.

"While Israel is highly multilingual, with a 20% Arabic-speaking minority and
large number of languages used by its enormous immigrant population - such as
the 600,000 Russian speakers and the 50,000 Ethiopians ,,, Hebrew is the
dominant language for official, public and private use of the 5,500,citizens.
One of the concomitants of this secular Zionist ideology has been the strong
encouragement of Hebrew learning and use by immigrants, and the active
discouragement of public (or even private use) of the other languages known
by the population. 

.... The national language is Hebrew, but only 60% of the Jewish population
were born is Israel, so that for about half of the Jewish population, Hebrew
is not the mother tongue .... for about 5% of the population ... the native
language was Yiddish. 

Language Education

Over the past few years, a number of fundamental changes have been taking
place in a piecemeal fashion in the policy concerning the place of languages
in Israeli education. These have now been crystallized in the first formal
statemtn of a Policy for Language Education in Israel, a document issued in
the Ministry of Education Director-General's Circular dated June 1, 1995,
re-isued 15 April 1996. The policy, its new features to take effect in
September 1996 covers mother tongue teaching, and second and foreign language
education. 

Foreign Language Education " 

[ My comment: Yiddish is dealt with as a foreign tongue ... the mame loshn of
Ashkenazi Jewry is not dealt wity under the rubric of "Mother Tongue
Education" -- what is wrong with this picture? ]

"... The policy encourages students to also study a third foreign language. 
Languages in which there exist programs are Yiddish (also used as the
language of instruction in the independent ultra-orthodox schools), Ladino,
Spanish and German ... The new policy also encourages the development of
special language schools. 

THE LANGUAGE EDUCATION SYSTEM

Organization of language education

The new policy rationalizes and modifies existing policies and practices, and
in particular sets general goals and lays down funding mechanisms for the
teaching of languages in the schools. Within the Ministry of Education,
responsibilities are shared by the Chief Inspectors for the various languages
(under the authority of the Pedagogical secretariat), the directors of the
various levels of education, and the curriculum division.  Furthersupervision
and direction is provided by local education districts.  FInal policy
decisions are made at the individual school level. 

The results therefore vary.... other languages for which there are
significant numbers of students are French, Russian and Yiddish. 

For each language, there is a curriculum drawn up by the chief inspector with
the advice of a national professional committee, and approved by the
Ministry. The curriculum also serves as the basis for the school leaving
examinations. 

Ministry policy provides a basis of optional and required teaching hours for
each language, but these hours may be supplemented by local educational
districts and by schools for their own resources. 

Teacher qualification and support

As a general rule, elementary school teahers are trained in teachers' college
and high school teachers in universities. The supply of trained teachers
varies by subject. ..... 

Language teachers are supported by Ministry and local education inspectors
and advisors, ...(many have only part-time positions). The cultural
institutes and attaches of the various countries involved also provide
varying amounts of support. 

TRENDS IN LANGUAGE EDUCATION

A major strengthening of languageeducation programs is under way. There is a
gradual move from the traditional monolingual (Hebrew) plus English program
and philosophy to a more open acceptance of multilingualism and language
maintenance. Increasing programs are leading to a growing professionalization
of the fields. Within the Ministry, the new policy has led to steps to bring
language inspectors together for the first time. The Ministry is funding a
three-year study by a university-based Language Policy Research Center. 

The full potential for developing language capacity is hardly realized. The
new Ministry policy acknowledges the unfortunate loss of the potential of
early immigrant languages (especially French and Arabic) and call to correct
this especially in the case of Russian..... 

...the new emphasis on language education and the new policy provide an
atmosphere in which these questions can be raised and discussed. "(
www.biu.ac.il/hu/prcmult.htm ) 

Sof tzitatziye. 

In di ramen fun azelkhe enderungen, un dem fakt fun a gezetz vos derklert az
Yidish un Ladino darfn beyde bakumen a milyon un a halb shekel af tzu
antviklen ot di arbet, un zeyendik az Ladino hot shoyn bakumen ire gelter,
fregt zikh nokhamol di zelbe kashe ... vu zaynen di onderhalben milyon shekel
vos balangt tzu Yidish limud???? 

sylvia schildt
baltimore, maryland
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.042

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html

