
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 07.120
December 15, 1997

1) A Lebedike Velt (sylvia schildt)
2) Comparing two authors (Lee Dembart)
3) WEVD; Socialists in US Congress (Harodl L. Orbach)
4) Nomberg's Tsvishn Berg (Louis Fridhandler)
5) Dictionary advice to students of Yiddish (Louis Fridhandler)
6) Good Yiddish style (Louis Fridhandler)
7) Vi men darf nitzn Mendele --etimologies un andere pilpulim (Mendy Fliegler)
8) kibosh (Ellen Prince)
9) kabash (Dan Gilman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 12 Dec 1997 14:21:50 +0100
From: creativa@charm.net (sylvia schildt)
Subject: A Lebedike Velt

Zogt nokh nit kin kadish iber mame loshn, mentshn, es iz a lebedike
velt af
der yidisher gas. me krigt zikh, me shaft nokh naye verk, es kumen
tzu yunge
mentshn fun meshpokhes vu me hot sheyn yidish fargesn, me hultyet
un
"klezevet" af yidish, khasidishe sektn bavayzn a nayem derekh eretz
far der
shprakh als shprakh, der forvertz iz tzugekumen tzum YIVO
ortografie un git
undz afile a kinder vinkl, eretz yisroyldike shuln firn on yidish klasn
reglmesik fun kindergortn biz universitet,organizatzies vi lansky's
tziyen tzu
iber 30,000 mitglider (un di mitglider kenen eykh vern tetik in andere
yidishe
grupes,) un azey vayter. afile in mizrakh eyrope, vu mir hobn ale
gegleybt, di
geshikhte iz sheyn a geshlosene benegeye yidish, kumt for nokh a
tkhies
hameysim. 

zikher iz nit genug. zikher iz nokh a sakh arbet tzu ton kdey tzu
farzikhern
az in hundert, 2 hundert yor arum, vet nokh zayn a mame loshn
oyser di arkhivn. 

di vikhtikste zakh iz az di yidishe organizatzies zoln arbetn
tzuzamen, nisht
vi konkurentn, nor vi teyln fun eyn guf. tzi frum tzi fray, tzi links tzi
rekhts, tzi gelernte tzi poshet folk,fum zol zayn vos far a rikhtung,
mir muzn
zikh shtitzn eyner dem andern. mir kenen afile zikh lernen fun di
andere
grupes. 

ilh shlog for az di yidishe organizatzies in ale shtet un shtetlekh zoln
rufn
a konferentz kdey oystzuforshn di beste mitlen tzu arbetn tzuzamen
af gemeyne
gebitn -- l'moshl lozn visn di mitglider vos fara ovntn, konferentzn
(u.a.v.)
veln forkumen -- l'moshl - vi azey me ken arbetn tzuzamen tzu
farinteresirn di
yugnt in yidish -- tzu fargresern di yidish klasn far dervaksene --
arayntzunemen yidish limud in di religieze shuln -- zen az bikher af
un vegn
yidish gefinin zikh in di bukhgesheftn, zen tzu brengen a bisele
yidish teater
tzu di mentshn, oder brengen di mentshn tzum yidish teater
(folksbiene,
u.a.v.) - a sakh tzu ton. es vet nemen nit veyniker vi a hundert yor,
nokhdem
veln mir vayter zen. 

Don't say kaddish over Yiddish yet, folks, things are hopping in the
world of
Yiddish. They're arguing, creating new works, young people are
emerging from
families in which Yiddish was already forgotten, people are carousing
and
klezing in Yiddish, Chasidic sects are showing new respect fpr the
language as
a language, the Forward has accepted YIVO orthography and is giving
us a
Children's Corner, Israeli schools are offering some regular Yiddish
classes
from K through University, organizations like Lansky's attract over
30,000
members (and some of these become active in other Yiddish groups)
etc. Even in
Eastern Europe, where we had all come to believe that history was
closed
relative to Yiddish, another resurrection of the dead is taking place. 

Of course, it's not enough. Of course there's still a lot of work to do
to
secure so that in a 100, 200 years from now,there wll be a mame
loshn outside
of archives. 

The most important thing is that Yiddish organizations work
together, not as
competitors, but as parts of one body. Religious or secular, left or
right,
scholars or just plain folks, from whatever orientation, we need to
support
one another. we can even learn from other groups. 

I propose that Yiddish organizations in each city or town call a
conference in
order to explore the best ways to work together on common areas
i.e., let
members know what meetings, conferences, etc. are going on, how
to work
together to interest youth in Yiddish -- to expand Yiddish classes for
adults,
integrate Yiddish classes into religious schools, see to it that books
in and
about Yiddish are t be found in bookstores, how to bring a little
Yiddish
theatre to the people, or bring the people to the Yiddish theatre
(Folksbiene,
etc.) -- a lot to do. It'll take at least a hundred years. After that, we'll
see.

Sylvia Schildt
Baltimore, Maryland

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 12 Dec 1997 21:34:28 EST
From: Dembart <Dembart@aol.com>
Subject: Comparing two authors

My mother asks what's the difference between the work of Sholem
Aleichem and
the work of Isaac Bashevis Singer.  Not a bad question.  Any
suggestions about
what I should tell her?  (Make believe that you're explaining it to your
grandmother.) 

A sheynem dank for your thoughts and help.

Lee Dembart
in San Francisco  

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 13 Dec 1997 13:38:05 -0600 (CST)
From: Harold L Orbach <hlorbach@ksu.edu>
Subject: WEVD; Socialists in US Congress

I thank Heyneckh Sapoznik (7.115) for clarifying the origin of Yiddish
on
WEVD.  I had certainly forgotten that WEVD had mostly non-Yiddish
programming,
indeed my mother had it as one of her favorite sources for music.
But the
main point, that it was as part of the _socialist_ yiddish movement
that it
developed yiddish radio remains. 

And while Ellyet Hersh Gertl (7.117) correctly notes that Bernard
Sanders of
Vermont is Jewish and a socialist personally, he has been elected to
Congress
(as he was as Mayor of Burlington earlier) as an independent and not
as
representing a socialist party as were Victor Berger and Meyer
London.  Berger
who had been mayor of Milwaukee did not streee his Jewish as
opposed to his
German background, while Meyer London campaigned in Yiddish on
the lower East
Side with the support of The Forward.  For the record, given the
maturity of a
good deal of our Mendelistn, they were the first to introduce (1912,
1916
respectively) legislation for a national system of old-age pensions
(social
security) based on social insurance. 

Harodl L. Orbach
Manhattan, Kansas

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 12 Dec 1997 19:23:23 EST
From: Lfridhan <Lfridhan@aol.com>
Subject: Nomberg's Tsvishn Berg

Andrey Bredstein (7.116, 9) seems to claim the following: because
the original
printing of Nomberg's Tsvishn Berg contained typographical errors, it
is
therefore all right (he uses the word _farshtendlekh_,
understandable) for the
reprint in Pakn- Treger to repeat them.  If that's his proposition, I
heartily
disagree.  My proposition: in the cause of Yiddishism, the needs of
today's
students of Yiddish (of all ages) should be paramount, and so the
text should
be as clear and as free of mistakes as possible. Typos only confuse
and
seriously get in the way of learning.

As to the retention of Germanized spelling in Tsvishn Berg:  I
maintain it is
unfortunate.  Advanced students must get used to Germanized
orthography when
studying old originals.  However, a reprint affords a golden
opportunity to
correct typos and bring Yiddish orthography up to date, and so
advance the
cause of teaching Yiddish to today's students of Yiddish.  Studying a
new
language is tough enough even with a standardized spelling system. 
Dictionaries that may help with the old spelling, if they exist today,
must be
rare indeed.  Who would reprint them, anyhow? 

As to the translation of Nomberg's use of viderig:  Yes, Weinreich
defines
_vider_ as ram.  I'm not impressed that therefore _repulsive_ is an
appropriate translation of _viderig_.  In German, Widder means ram.
If
Nomberg meant viderig to signify ram-like, then he may have meant
something
like bumptious (and so related in meaning to the German widrig,
unfriendly,
antagonistic as I suggested).  It certainly is not _vi a sheps_ (sheps is
Andrey Bredstein's word), sheep-like. 

These are my humble opinions.  No one can claim absolute,
Olympian authority. 
Not even a dictionary that weighs a ton or two.  Nomberg was the
only
authority on what he meant, and so we need to maintain appropriate,
scholarly
humility.  The original Yiddish does, indeed, matter more than any
translation. 

As to Nomberg's style: While acknowledging our debt to Nomberg for
his efforts
in the cause of Yiddishism, that has nothing to do with any opinion
about his
style of writing.  I do think that in Tsvishn Berg, his style is very stiff
and seems as formal as a heel-clicking German officer.  I can't help
my
reaction, and students ought to understand something about style.
This piece
does not reflect the humor, the warm and chilling ironies, or the
rhythmic,
touching, sometimes musical lilts that are the wonders of the best
Yiddish
writing, for both serious and entertainment purposes.  Nomberg
himself was
probably nothing like his writing.  But I imagine that a style highly
admired
by some in those days led him to write like that in Tsvishn Berg, set
in and
near Munich. 

Let's hope this discussion doesn't unravel into yet another endless
one like
the one about davenen.  Oy vey!  Kholile!

Louis Fridhandler

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 13 Dec 1997 17:44:22 EST
From: Lfridhan <Lfridhan@aol.com>
Subject: Dictionary advice to students of Yiddish

In advancing the cause of Yiddishism, reading the older literature is
quite
important and the serious student (beginner or advanced) often
requires the
aid of a number of dictionaries.  Obviously, Weinreich and Harkavy
are
essential.  Stutshkov sometimes saves the day.  Hebrew-English is
always
helpful; German-, Russian-, and Polish-English are useful for Sholem
Aleichem's older pieces and Peretz's works.  I wish I had a
Ukrainian-English
one, but haven't found one yet.  The latter would, I imagine, be
especially
helpful in reading the early Sholem Aleichem.  He was steeped in the
Yiddish
that developed among Ukrainian neighbors.  Students of various
translations
have judged translations of Sholem Aleichem into Ukrainian to be the
most
felicitous. 

For help in penetrating occasionally difficult Yiddish, I use Weinreich,
Harkavy and Stutshkov, plus three Hebrew dictionaries, as well as
German,
Russian and Polish dictionaries.  However, meanings of words
borrowed by
Yiddish are sometimes different (at least subtly) from meanings in
the source
language.  Since the serious beginner soon becomes a veteran
hungry for more,
not one of these dictionaries is superfluous (and no one has to be a
weightlifter). 

Louis Fridhandler

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 13 Dec 1997 17:44:20 EST
From: Lfridhan <Lfridhan@aol.com>
Subject: Good Yiddish style

I reread some of the fine Yiddish style of I.D. Berkowitz in Undzere
Rishoynim, comparing it to Tsvishn Berg.  I intended no
disparagement of
Nomberg personally, but I deplored the stilted, heavily Germanized
language,
spelling and style of Nomberg's Tsvishn Berg (latest issue of Der
Pakn-
Treger).  Now, it's probably my obligation to indicate what I mean by
_good_
Yiddish language, spelling and style.  Berkowitz's Undzere Rishoynim
(published 1966), among much other Yiddish writing, will do
admirably.  In the
main, Berkowitz records his memoirs of Sholem Aleichem, but
includes much
more.  The work consists of five precious, enlightening Yiddish
volumes which
can, all five together, be held in one hand.  (I've actually tried, and it
works!)  If these volumes are still available, I recommend them
unreservedly
to bathe the mind and heart and ear in flowing, flavorful delights of
the
Yiddish spirit, the rhythmic Yiddish music, and more. 

I refer especially to Chapters 1 and 2 of Volume 1 (alef), of Undzere
Rishoynim (Our Pioneers), by I.D. Berkowitz, Tel Aviv: Hamenora
Publishing
House, 1966.  As a bar-mitsve boy Berkowitz secretly read haskole
literature
and novels in Hebrew stashed out of sight in his yeshive prayer
stand.  Then
he subscribed to the local library in Slutsk, but soon exhausted the
Hebrew
collection, and was offered _zhargonishe bikher_.  Zhargon was a
lofty name,
in those days, for ordinary Yiddish then belittled because it was
accessible
to women and servant-girls.  He read Shomer's shund novels,
swallowed them
greedily one after the other, and soon exhausted them.  Feeling
desperately
lost at the prospect of no more books to read, Berkowitz was led by
the
librarian to another room.  The old man opened a drawer to reveal a
treasured
book in zhargon which he was guarding as a legacy for his children.
It was
the first volume (1888) of Sholem Aleichem's Di Yidishe
Folksbibliotek.  And
that was young Berkowitz's introduction to the possibility of a more
glorious
future for fine Yiddish belles-lettres.  At the time, he did not fully
appreciate that. 

Berkowitz writes of his great pleasures in reading the various writers.
Certain metaphors sound much, much better in Yiddish.  Using a
musical
metaphor, he calls the writers members of a choir conducted by
Sholem Aleichem
(p. 29).  Then comes a metaphor mixing oral and auditory features:
gezupt
pamelekh un zikh tsugehert tsu yedn zup - sipped slowly and
listened closely
to every sip (p. 31).  On p. 32, Berkowitz writes of having already
read
Mendele in Hebrew, but now encountering him for the first time in
Yiddish: in
hebreyish hot er tsu mir in mayne ershte yorn geredt tif interesant,
nor dortn
hot er dos geredt durkh a farmakhtn fentster.  Do, in dem
"vintshfingerl," dos
ershte verk zayns, vos ikh hob geleyent af yidish, iz dos fentster
geven ofn,
di alte shtim hot geklungen klor un daytlekh, un di alte batamte
shprakh,
khotsh oykh gedikht un klepik, vi guter honik, hot zikh ibergegosn
glaykh in
hartsn arayn.  (Translation) In my earliest years, his Hebrew words
spoke to
me in a deeply interesting way, but then he seemed to be speaking
through a
closed window.  Here, in "dos vintshfingerl," the first of his works I
read in
Yiddish, the window was open, and the old voice rang out clear and
distinct,
and the tangy talk, though dense and thick as good honey, poured
right into my
heart. 

Now that is fine Yiddish in my opinion!

Louis Fridhandler

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 13 Dec 1997 23:34:45 -0200
From: emenems@juno.com (Mendy Fliegler)
Subject: Vi men darf nitzn Mendele --etimologies un andere
pilpulim...

Veyst dokh, khevre, az mayn Feter Yankl (O.haSh.) fleg mikh strashen
ven ikh
bin geven a kleyn kind, az er vet mikh 'upshnaydn'... Nu, efsher,
take, darf
men 'upshnaydn' mit di etimologies... efsher zoln di gute khevre vus
viln
vayter zikh shpiln mit di verter... efsher zoln zay zikh avekzetsn
dortn oyfn
'Mendele' 'nets (Web), un git iberkayen, un efsher shtoysn zikh
gezundterheyt,
vus zey viln. Dan veln mir kenen araynbrengen _du_ naye, shaferishe
temes
epes... Un Noyekh, zolst du zayn gezindt un shtark... 

Mendy Fliegler

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 14 Dec 1997 00:51:00 EST
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: kibosh

In response to Lance Garmer's query about _kibosh_ [07.118], the
word is of
course English and is even in the now-venerable Webster's Third both
as a noun
and as a verb, tho I'd never heard it as a verb before reading his
query.
(I've heard and used it only in the phrase _put the kibosh on_.) As for
where
it comes from, both Webster's III and the most recent American
Heritage (3rd
ed.) list it as 'Origin unknown'. The Hebrew word Garmer cites is
interesting
but I'd be surprised if it came into English via Yiddish given its stress
pattern (not too many two-syllable words in Yiddish with the stress
on the
second syllable), plus of course the annoying fact that it doesn't
seem to
exist in Yiddish, and it seems both too recent to have been borrowed
directly
from Hebrew in the first wave of Hebrew borrowings (e.g. shibboleth,
hallelujah)  and too old to have been borrowed in the second wave
(e.g.
kibbutz, pita).  'Tis a puzzlement.

Ellen Prince

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 14 Dec 1997 03:13:34 -0500
From: Dan Gilman <dgilman@haverford.edu>
Subject: kabash

In 07.118, Lance Garmer wrote in asking about the word "kabash."  I
have heard
the word used as he or she describes, but written as "kibosh."  I
always
assumed that it was pronounce "kbosh," in a quasi-hebreish way, but
a few
months back, an episode of "Seinfeld," of all things, featured the
word. 
Throughout the show, everybody pronounced it "kay' bosh" in a
strange
English-language mutilation of the printed word.  Since the show is
known for
running gags that go on for years, it struck me as odd that no one
questioned
the pronunciation. Not being familiar with Polish, I just assumed that
it was
of Yiddish origin somewhere back there, and took on an unfortunate
spelling in
English.  Garmer's usage, though, is just as I know it:  to put the
kibosh on
something or someone.

Dan Gilman
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 07.120

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



