
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 09.079
April 22, 2000

1) A Talk by Dina Abramowicz (Louis Fridhandler)
2) Dina Abramowicz (Sam Kweskin)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 8 Apr 2000 14:10:57 -0400 (EDT)
From: Lfridhan@aol.com
Subject: A Talk by Dina Abramowicz

I, too, remember, with admiration, pleasure and feelings of loss, Dina
Abramowicz: her brilliance, her energy in her mid-seventies as she frisked
up and down a step ladder to quickly find an answer to some question from a
reader or from someone on the phone.  In firm and authoritative voice, blue
eyes flashing with intelligence, she switched easily (it seemed) from
language to language.  I was intimidated at first as I could tell she
brooked no idle talk from anyone.  She had no time for that.  I soon found
out how kind and helpful she was.

Once she referred me to one of her Yiddish publications, a talk accepting an
award.  Reading it, I felt that this important piece, alternately charming
and informative and pain-filled, should be more widely available to an
English-reading audience.  I have translated it.  In it, she quotes a poem
by Sutzkever.  Parts of it are beyond my translation skills, so I have
omitted those few parts.  I believe, however, that the meaning she intended
by her quotation is transmitted.

Here is my translation of her piece in Yidishe Kultur, 8:37-43, Nov.-Dec.,
1982.

LET NOT OUR ROOTS BE OBLITERATED... by Dina Abramowicz

Dear friends:

It is a great honor to receive the Zhitlovski prize, and I must admit I do
not feel worthy.  But friend Itshe Goldberg would not be dissuaded, and I
had to yield.  I humbly accept this honor and understand that I am simply an
instrument through which is expressed recognition of the work I do and the
institution with which it is linked: The Institute for Jewish Research,
YIVO, and its library.

Friend Goldberg (who probably breathes ink and paper rather than fresh air),
and people like him, understand very well the significance of libraries;
that a library houses the treasure of a people's culture.  Its absence would
make it impossible to forge the spiritual connection between generations,
that golden chain that links past, present and future.  This applies to all
libraries, but a Yiddish library of the post-Holocaust era bears an even
greater mission.  The enemy not only wanted to destroy our people, but also
attacked its culture.  They began with burning books, and when the war broke
out, ordered its Ministry of Culture to confiscate and destroy all Jewish
books in occupied territories.  The effort largely succeeded:  Nowadays,
there are almost no Yiddish books in all of Europe.  In America, too, where
the Jewish culture is a transplanted one, a Yiddish book (especially an old
one) is quite rare.  Therefore, a Yiddish library (especially one
representing the creativity of Eastern European Yiddish culture) bears a
double mission: to give pleasure and contentment in the written word, and to
rescue the written word from the storm on a kind of Noah's ark.  Often, only
one copy of its kind could be saved.

My acquaintanceship with Jewish/Yiddish libraries began during my years in
the Vilna of former times.  Known as the Jerusalem of Lithuania, Vilna could
take pride in her libraries which were famous in all the Jewish world.  One
of them was the Strashun library, founded by the maskil, Matthias Strashun,
at the end of the 19th century.  The library, which represented Torah and
Lithuanian Jewish scholarship, was very rich in rare books (even
incunabula), and was a typical Vilna phenomenon: besides religious books, it
included the great achievements of the haskole era as well as modern
Jewish/Yiddish literary creativity.  Students of the secular Jewish schools
(I was one of them) could and did benefit from the library.  Another great
communal library in Vilna was the lending library of the Society for the
Dissemination of Enlightenment [St. Petersburg], which contained Jewish
books in various languages.  The YIVO library, founded together with YIVO in
1925 made its own contribution to the richness of character of the Vilna
library-ambience.  It was designed to be an academic and research library
whose aim encompassed (exhaustively and systematically) the whole gamut of
Jewish/Yiddish creative activity from earliest times to the present day,
from classic works to trash novels, from historical documents to fly-leaves,
wall posters and creative activity of people in general.  That was a rather
novel undertaking, an effort to create a comprehensive collection to serve
as a firm foundation for scientific research into Eastern European Jewry and
its culture. In overwhelming measure, that was a culture in Yiddish.

The effort succeeded quite well. In the 13-year existence of YIVO (until the
outbreak of World War II), YIVO amassed a library of over 100,000 volumes,
among which were extremely rare specimens.

Let us cite a couple of examples.  One of them was the original edition of
Mendl Lefin's translation of "Proverbs" into Yiddish (Tarnopol, 1814).  The
language was innovative.  Mendl Lefin did not employ the archaic,
"canonized"  mode of expression [ivre-taytsh: stylized archaic Yiddish.
L.F.], but the spoken language of his time.  This was a highly revolutionary
advance.  He used Slavisms and ordinary, every-day words.  Many scholarly
Jews of that time considered his work blasphemous, but Mendl Lefin's aim was
to bring Holy Writ closer to the ordinary, toiling masses, and to teach them
wisdom in their own language.

Another rare specimen was a booklet with the sacred title, Tsafnat Paneyakh
[Revealer of Secrets. L.F.].  As is known, it is the nickname of Joseph the
Wise [given to him by the Egyptian Pharaoh: Genesis 41, 45. L.F.] who could
interpret dreams and generally hidden matters.  The booklet bore its fine
name because it laid bare a secret: the existence of an unknown continent.  
The sub-title was "Discovery of America."  According to Zalman Reyzen's
information, this was the first book about America to reach the Jews of
Eastern Europe.

Besides books, YIVO had organized a comprehensive archival collection of
newspapers.  Organized and preserved were the press of Poland, Soviet
Russia, and all countries of Jewish emigration including, of course,
America.  Remarkably, with regard to Poland, they collected not only the
newspapers of great centers, but also the modest local press of provincial
towns.  Thus, one could find such newspapers as Byalistok Lebn (Byalistok
Life), Lubliner Togblat (Lublin Daily), Palyesier Shtime (Voice of Palyesi),
and others.  Their significance was that they reflected local Jewish life,
the life of Jewish masses right where they lived, as seen with their own
eyes.

Such an approach to materials (in modern scientific terms: primary sources)  
was very remarkable at that time, and bears witness to the pioneering spirit
and far-sightedness of the founders of YIVO.  In the first rank of its
founders were Zalman Reyzen, the researcher of the Yiddish language and
literature, and Dr. Max Weinreich, one of the greatest Jewish scholars of
our time.

The fate of YIVO, its library and archives in the Holocaust period is a
special chapter in the long history of Jewish Martyrology.  The same YIVO
building that was built with so much effort and fine hopes, and was the
center of work on Jewish/Yiddish culture for the whole world, was
transformed by the Germans into a garbage dump into which they threw books
and archival treasures from all Jewish libraries and museums in Vilna.

Herman Kruk, supervisor of the Vilna Ghetto library, describes (in his diary
of the Vilna Ghetto) what he saw when he visited the YIVO building.  
Papers, books, files with rare documents were scattered all over the ground,
stepped on, dirty, mixed up, chaotic beyond description.  Quite a large
portion of the treasure was discarded by the Germans as garbage or used as
pulp to make paper.  However, after a time, even they perceived that their
"culture-purification" was barbarous and worked against their interests: the
materials could be used in their own research institutes, or sold for ready
cash.  They then ordered the Vilna Judenrat to appoint a committee of
experts to select those materials of value.  To that committee was appointed
a group of learned people and writers, among them the scientific
collaborator of YIVO, Zelik Kalmanovitsh, and the poet, Abraham Sutskever.  
This group truly displayed a spirit of self-sacrifice.  Working under the
watchful eye of the Gestapo who could have shot them to death on the spot
for the slightest suspicion of illegal activity, they managed to rescue a
number of rare books and documents, and smuggle them into the Ghetto.

What the people of this group suffered (as well as those of the world of
Jewish culture in general), as they witnessed the destruction of the
treasures of their culture, can perhaps best be conveyed by a poet.  Here
are a few stanzas of Sutzkever's poem, "Kernels of Wheat":

[Part of the poem in English]

Before the bullet finds me, 
I bring you a packet of gifts: 
Old pages of Talmud. 
Words fashioned on parchment 
through thousands of harrowing years.

As though I were shielding an infant, 
I run holding voices of Jews; 
I grope blindly; 
The soul shall not be slaughtered.

O my arms, reach, reach into fire;
Exult, for the essence endures!
What anguish
To witness a stray page of writing so sacred
Borne off on a gust thick with smoke.

I choke on secret poems.

I dig, I plant manuscripts;

When waves of despair dash over me,
I think then of Egypt: the story of kernels of wheat.

The poem is entitled "Kernels of Wheat" because the poet was reminded in the
midst of his despair, of a story he had read somewhere: that kernels of
wheat, found buried in an Egyptian pyramid for thousands of years, had again
sprouted when sown in fresh earth.  His prophetic vision was, in part,
realized.  The books and documents that the committee members had smuggled
into the Vilna Ghetto were recovered after the liberation and transferred to
YIVO.  They are known as the Sutzkever-Kaczerginski Collection.  The first
edition of Mendl Lefin's "Proverbs" (cited earlier) belongs to that
collection.  Obviously, however, only a few items could be rescued that way.  
The other classified books and archival materials remained in German hands,
and were exported to Germany.

An act of historical justice may be read into the fact that the stolen
Jewish/Yiddish cultural treasures were found in defeated, occupied Germany,
and sent on to YIVO.  This, of course, offers only partial satisfaction: no
one can return to us members of the committee who were killed, and no one
will replace the countless Jewish/Yiddish cultural documents that have been
forever lost.

The Vilna materials were handed over to the New York branch of YIVO in the
early fifties.  However, the YIVO library had already started to function on
American soil in 1940 when YIVO headquarters were officially transferred to
New York.  The founder, creator and organizer of the New York YIVO library
was Mendl Elkin, the first librarian.  "The Central Jewish/Yiddish Library
and Archives" had already been organized with his participation.  In
October, 1939, the library was incorporated into the American section of
YIVO, and in 1940, it became the YIVO library.

Mendl Elkin was a wonderful person, with great enthusiasm for Yiddish and
Yiddish culture, with connections in all aspects of the world of Yiddish
culture of his time.  Thanks to his connections, he obtained for the YIVO
library such important collctions as the Morris Vintchevsy Library, the
great archives of Dr. Chaim Zhitlovsky, and the Kalmen Marmor treasury of
books.  As he used to say, he was never too lazy to creep into attics and
cellars, picking up Jewish/Yiddish books that no longer had a place in
American-Jewish "living rooms."  He was, indeed, properly proud of his
achievement.  I remember how he once remarked to a guest: it is now
difficult to find a Jewish/Yiddish book that is not in the YIVO library.

The Jewish books (more correctly, the books in Yiddish) are, indeed, the
heart of the YIVO library.  Dr. Eliezer Marvik has estimated that we hold
the major portion of the Hebrew-Yiddish section of the Congress library in
Washington [National Library of Congress? L.F.], the largest collection of
Jewish/Yiddish books in our country.  It is certainly not a complete
collection (we strive to make it so), and we are grateful to every one who
wishes to help us in the effort.

The length of my talk is already, it seems to me, straining your patience.  
However, I would like to say a few words on what the YIVO library does,
besides collecting.  One other important task is preservation.  Collecting
is not enough.  The paper on which the older books were printed has a life
span of about 50 to 100 years.  For a rather large number of our books, the
limit has been reached. The books are falling apart, the yellowed paper
crumbles.  We can save these books photographically on microfilm.  This is a
costly procedure which the YIVO library is trying to advance little by
little.  We have microfilmed European Yiddish publications, a collection
entitled, "Yiddish Classics on Microfiche."  This includes the work of the
classic writers (Mendele, Sholem-Aleichem, and Peretz) that were published
during the lifetime of each, and are so-called authorized editions.  We are
now microfilming YIVO's rare collection of Yiddish children's literature,
estimated to consist of over 1000 items.

The third field in which the YIVO library labors is bibliography.  For
decades, we have contributed an annual list of Jewish/Yiddish books to the
"Yearbook of Jewish/Yiddish bikherrat."  On the basis of our collections,
one of our co-workers has put together a list of Yizkor-books (hundreds have
been published).  This list is now heavily used for research in history and
genealogy.  A current project is preparation of a comprehensive bibliography
of all Yiddish books, a catalog to be issued in book form.  This is a rather
ambitious project, involving tens of thousands of books.  Still far from
realization, we are working on it.

Our fourth and last field is reference.  The fundamental bibliographies of
Jewish/Yiddish books concerning the Holocaust period have been based on YIVO
collections. Work on "The Great Dictionary of the Yiddish Language" was in
large measure carried out using YIVO materials.  The same may be said for
the eight volumes of the "Lexicon of Modern Yiddish Literature" which the
Culture Congress has issued over the years.  Professors, and young academic
people visit us often.  Besides them, we also serve all interested people.

It may interest you to hear a couple of examples that may give you an idea
of the scope of problems that can be resolved in a library, especially a
Yiddish library.

Among the many telephone calls in the course of a day, we received one in
Russian.  The woman apologized for speaking Russian.  She had been in the
country a total of just six months, still had no command of English, and
knew no Yiddish.  Her story was written up in a Yiddish journal issued in
Soviet Russia, "Sovetish Heymland."  She came from Odessa, and during the
great war between the Soviet Union and Germany [World War II], she was an
underground fighter, a Partisan.  Besides her gun, she loved another
instrument, namely the guitar, and she often used to appear with it to play
at large and small gatherings.  This combination of gun and guitar made her
famous, and "Sovetish Heymland" had sent one of its correspondents from
Moscow to interview this interesting personality: a plain woman of the
people, who had selected for herself two such unusual occupations.  Now she
wished to show to her friends and neighbors here (as well as her
grandchildren who had come along in the meantime) the issue that told all
about her, and which included her picture.  Could we help?  The answer was
yes.  We had a complete set of that journal, and offered to make a copy of
the article, but a Xerox copy was of no interest.  She wanted the journal
itself.  (It is quite something else to see the original rather than a
copy.)  Luckily, we had a duplicate.  The woman was happy, and for us it was
very satisfying to help a Soviet Jewish woman who had arrived in a friendly,
but alien land, and wanted to retrace her lost past.

A second case, also quite meaningful, involved a young woman born in
America.  She, too, was searching (perhaps unconsciously) for her lost
roots.  Her father had died not long before, and during the unveiling of his
gravestone, the Rabbi had recited a poem [in Yiddish].  Only a few words
stuck in her memory.  She knew no Yiddish, but two words she remembered were
klang (sound), and gezang (singing).  She very much wished to get the whole
poem.  Was it possible?

These words were, indeed, suited to the occasion.  They were from one of 
Abraham Reyzen's poems (Collected Poems, New York, 1951).  Two stanzas of 
that poem are carved on his gravestone and read:

Zing, neshome zing,
Kurts der veg, tsi lang --
S'endikt say vi say
Vi a vayt gezang....

Zing, neshome, zing
Lebn heyst -- gezang,          
Un dernokh vet zayn          
Sheyn der viderklang          
          ....
[My translation, L.F.]
Sing, my soul, sing!
Be the trail short or long,
No matter; it ends
As a distant song.

To sing is to live!
Then sing, my soul, sing;
And later, a beautiful
Echo shall ring.

The young woman could not read Yiddish.  We read the poem aloud to her, and 
tears welled in her eyes as she stared at us, stunned.

I have set forth this example which seems to me symbolic: we try to ensure 
that the sounds [of our culture] shall not be effaced without an echo; that 
our roots shall not become entangled and erased.  Let us hope for success.

Louis Fridhandler

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Apr 2000 20:54:10 -0400 (EDT)
From: ESSAIKAY@aol.com
Subject: Dina Abramowicz

I am among the many hundreds--and even thousands--who profited from the
kindnesses and culture and knowledge of Dina Abramowicz. In the years
1978-1981, while issuing the quarterly "Vilkija", the genealogical
newsletter of relatives and friends who came from that beknighted village
west of Kovno, that wonderful librarian was able to practically take me by
the hand to show me where, how and which to search for information. She was
a lighthouse among librarians, a mistress of her 'fach", and she will long
be remembered and missed and honored.

Sam Kweskin
Boca Raton, Fl
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 09.079

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



