
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.059
September 17, 1998

90 yoriker yoyvl fun der ershter yidisher shprakh-konferents in Tshernovits
                                 Part IX

1) mates mizeses farteydikung fun der yidisher shprakh (Mordkhe Schaechter)
2) Czernowitz and Barcelona: two language conferences (Holger Nath)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 17 Sep 1998 17:59:39 EDT
From: MSchaecht@aol.com
Subject: mates mizeses farteydikung fun der yidisher shprakh

[Fragments from the article published in "Afn Shvel", No.271, 1988]

mates (matesyohu) mizes (er flegt zayn familie oyslaygn afn fartsaytikn
shteyger: mizish) iz geven a forsher un shrayber af daytshish, poylish,
hebreish un yidish. zayne temes: shprakhn, shrift, religie, antisemitizm,
vekedoyme. er iz der bal-mekhaber fun tsvey klasishe verk vegn der historie
fun mame-loshn: 1) Die Entstehungsursache der jÅdischen Dialekte (Wien, 1916,
reprinted Hamburg: H. Buske, 1979); 2) Die jiddische sprache; eine
historische grammatik des idioms der integralen Juden Ost- und Mitteleuropas
(Berlin, Wien: B. Harz, 1924). 

in 1908 af der tshernovitser konferents iz er (agev: a gebirtiker in der
alter galitsisher shtot premisle) nokh geven a 23-yoriker yunger-man, khotsh
a shtikl shem vi a shrayber af hebreish hot er shoyn gehot. 

keyn ofitsieln omt af der konferents hot mizes nisht farnemen, ober a
tsentrale role hot er yo geshpilt. zayn referat vegn mame-loshn hot gemakht a
kolosaln royshem: bay di yidishistn - an entuziastishn, bay di
anti-yidishistn - a bitern protest (geshrayen un afile geveynen). perets hot
firgelaygt, me zol dos referat mizeses aroysgebn vi a bazundere broshur.
aroysgegebn bazundererhayt hot men es nisht, ober inem band _di ershte
yidishe shprakh-konferents_ (yivo, 1932, zz'143-193) iz mizeses referat arayn
gantserhayt. do veln mir ibergebn bekitser teyln fun di hoyptargumentn fun
zayn kulldiker, kimat advokatish tsunoyfgeshtelter farteydikung fun der
yidisher shprakh kegn di bilbulim vos koydem antisemitn un meshumodim in
meshekh fun hunderter yorn, un shpeter - in akhtsetn, nayntsetn un
tsvantsikstn yorhundert - provintsiele maskilim, hiperhebreistn, asimilatorn
un glat grobe-yungen hobn oysgeklert. lomir gedenken, az moshe mendelson,
yoysef fridlender un andere pionirn fun der haskala hobn mame-loshn gemakht
mit der blote tsu glaykh: der "shmutsiker zhargon" iz "shuldik in der
ummoralishkayt funem yid fun a gants yor".  haynrikh grets, vos af zayn
historie funem yidishn folk hobn zikh oyfgehovet doyres mizrakh-eyropeishe
inteligentn, hot mame-loshn ongerufn "a halb animalishe shprakh". di amolike
baleydikunger (arayngerekhnt "golus-shprakh", "fardorbener daytshisher
dialekt" ud"gl) klingen undz haynt poshet idiotish, ober in 1908 hot men oyf
zay nor gedarft entfern, un mates mizes hot er getun oyf a maysterishn ufn, i
in a gentser serie hebreishe artiklen, ober dereykrisht balpe, mit zayn
referat af der tshernevitser sprakh-konferents. 

Mordkhe Schaechter

[Romanized by Ester Vaisman]

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 16 Sep 1998 14:59:14 +0200
From: "Holger.Nath" <nath@uni-duesseldorf.de>
Subject: Czernowitz (1908) and Barcelona (1906): two language conferences

[Fragments from the article, that will be published in "Politics of Yiddish : 
studies in language, literature, and society", Dov-Ber Kerler (Ed.), Walnut
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 1998. 224 p. ISBN 0761990240, 0761990259 (pbk.)]

In 1906, the First International Conference of the Catalan language took
place in Barcelona (Spain). Although Yiddish and Catalan belong to different
language families and have a completely different political and literary
history, the language conferences reveal interesting parallels and
differences in the struggle of minority languages for recognition. 

In January 1904, Alcover, a priest from Majorca, the founder of Catalan
philology,. suggested a Catalan conference on syntax, which he considered
crucial for the future of the language. Alcover saw the strongest threat of
Castilian on Catalan syntax, being, as he says "the soul of the language". 
From its beginning, the conference was planned as an international event to
promote the prestige of Catalan. 3,000 participants registered for the First
Catalan conference, 494 of which voted in the sessions. A truly impressive
number, if we compare it to 70 registered participants at the Czernowitz
Conference, although about 1,000 attended the folksfarzamlung. 

If we look at the invitations to both conferences we see certain similarities
from a formal point of view: They consist of (a) a letter explaining the
necessity for a language conference and (b) a list of topics to be discussed
at the conferences. Although both invitations address basically the same
problems, they differ in their approaches: the Catalan one appeals more
strongly to the readers and to their contributing to the conference.
Furthermore, the Catalan language itself is depicted in the role of a
persecuted victim, being separated from its ancient glory. 

Besides the question of status and the influence of other languages on
Yiddish, the Yiddish invitation to the Czernowitz Conference addresses the
lack of standardization and the necessity for establishing some kind of
authority.  Alcover points out fewer topics, but is more direct and strict in
his demands. The Yiddish invitation by Birnbaum displays a more optimistic
view: the fate of Yiddish has already changed to its favor, but not
sufficiently. 

To what can we attribute the different approach? Here we find again the idea
of the Catalan language in decline and Yiddish as a rising language.  The
reason should be sought in extra-linguistic factors in both language groups. 

Catalonia represents a fairly confined area. The history of Catalonia, its
decline and its domination by the central government in Madrid for centuries
made the population receptive to a nationalistic (language)  movement. A
growing economic power in Catalonia and open support from the Catholic Church
strengthened these tendencies which aimed at on "enemy":  Castilian. 

Yiddish is a language of dispersion without a fixed language territory,
spread over Eastern Europe and other continents. The invitation to Czernowitz
was written in New York. Jews were citizens of different states and subject
to different policies towards minority groups. Furthermore, the economic and
political situation of East European Jews did not allow them to rise to a
significant position of power. The Jews lacked the kind of support that the
Catalans enjoyed from the State Church. Instead of the unifying factor of
language which united opposing groups in Catalonia, we find fragmentation
concerning a Jewish language. The spectrum ranged roughly from (a)
assimilation and adaptation of the co-territorial non-Jewish language by
assimilated Jews, over (b) Hebrew, favored by Zionism to (c) Yiddish, favored
by Yiddishism. This fragmentation was to become the main point of discussion
at the Czernowitz Conference. 

In this light, Catalan seems to be in a much stronger position. It might
explain the approach by Birnbaum et al. and how the invitation for Czernowitz
was formulated. Here we do not find any nationalist ideas, but a
supra-national, unifying concept: Yiddish literature. 

If we look at the suggested topics for the conferences, the Catalan ones
exceed by far in number and detail the Yiddish list. The Catalan invitation
emphasizes a linguistic approach to justify the claims. It defines and
stresses the position of Catalan as an essential part of Romance Studies
abroad as well as inside of Catalonia. 

The Catalan list of topics strongly emphasizes linguistic aspects (altogether
21 out of 24 topics), whereas only two points deal with the role of
literature, and one with the recognition of Catalan.  The Yiddish language
does not openly address the question of nationalism or national language.
Yet, it might be concealed under the last point of the proposed topics. The
distributed topics display supra-national and very practical aspects: the
linguistic approach to language and standardization, the role of literature
and arts, financial matters concerning the designated promoters of Yiddish,
and, finally, the recognition of Yiddish. 

Both, Alcover and Birnbaum, stress the role of literature and the press in
sensitizing the population to language issues. Alcover seems to be more
successful with the `media' which is facilitated by the size of the language
territory. The relatively early preparations for the Catalan Conference and
the close coverage of every step in the Catalan press and in the Bolleti del
Diccionari de la Llengua Catalana (`Bulletin for the Dictionary of the
Catalan Language') prepared the ground for a `catalanized' and very
enthusiastic population. 

Both lists agree on the necessity to standardize orthography as step towards
recognizing both languages. How can one claim not to speak a jargon, but a
language if the written language is (as one of the speakers at the Catalan
Conference said) "in a state of anarchy"? Standardization has therefore to go
hand in hand with the compilation of a grammar and a dictionary. It is
probably no coincidence that at a time of upcoming nationalism and the
formation of nation-states, the number of dictionaries, grammars, and dialect
studies increased. That is why Alcover stresses in his inauguration speech
the necessity for a Catalan dictionary as a symbol of nationality and Catalan
language. 

So far, the invitations stress the ideal proceedings of both conferences. 
The outcome of the Czernowitz Conference proved to be different. An important
factor of the Catalan Conference was the role of dialects in the framework of
the language. The plurality of those dialects was successfully expressed in
speeches and numerous papers during the Catalan Conference.  Representatives
from Valencia, Roussillon, Sardinia, and the Balearic Isles gave inauguration
speeches in their respective dialects. Symbolizing the ancient boundaries of
the Medieval Catalan Empire, they stressed the linguistic and cultural unity
of all Catalonia in contrast to Castilia. But is it not also a way of
indicating: if there are dialects, there must also be a unifying language ?
It is not surprising that a Catalan, not a Castilian dialect atlas was to be
published first on the Iberian Peninsula.  As to Czernowitz, speakers came
from different Yiddish dialect areas. Yet, they did not come as
representatives of designated dialect areas, but as representatives of
political organizations, to represent or to achieve political unity among
Jews. 

Both conferences tried to base their languages and cultures in history as
well: Sholem Asch suggested "Dos ibertrogn fun altertimlekhe kulturgiter in
der yidisher shprakh".  Catalan speakers discussed new publications of Old
Catalan texts and how Old Catalan literature could successfully be used for
the renaissance of Catalan culture. 

As we all know, the Czernowitz Conference was impeded by the discussion of
the status of Yiddish as a national language. Dawidowicz summarizes it as
follows: 
      "The excess of ideological debates prevented the conference from
       acting on Birnbaum's concrete proposals to standardize Yiddish
       spelling and punctuation and to compile a Yiddish dictionary."
       (Dawidowicz 1984: 67).  
A similar question was touched at the Catalan Conference two years earlier. 
Catalan did not have a rival language as was the case with Yiddish and
Hebrew. The language question arose within standardized Catalan in relation
to its various dialects. The opinions about the role of dialects were quite
split in the discussion of a unified literary language. Suggestions to
promote the use of dialects as the 'true life of a language' were opposed as
a step towards anarchy and a loss of cultural identity and plurality.  Thus,
one participant of the conference favored a neutral standardized language,
since each of the various dialects was influenced by its co-territorial
languages or was corrupted like the dialect of Barcelona.

The language question, however, did not disrupt the Catalan Conference as it
did in Czernowitz. That was due to the common goal of all conference
participants of recognizing the Catalan language. The controversy emerged
later, after that goal had been reached, when a linguistic dominance, no
longer from Madrid, but now in Barcelona, became the cause of complaint after
1979, the foundation of the Principat de Catalunya. 

 As far as the effects of the Conferences are concerned, we observe the
continuation of a stronger interest in the study of both Catalan and Yiddish.
Griera's Catalan Dialect Atlas was a concrete result of the Catalan
Conference which stimulated more linguistic research. Although Alcover's and
Moll's Catalan Dictionary was begun before the Catalan Conference, it
underlines these tendencies. As a direct outcome of the Conference we
perceive the foundation of the Institut d'Estudis Catalans (`Institute for
Catalan Studies') in 1907. Although the Czernowitz Conference promoted the
formation of an organizing committee for the next Yiddish conference, no
institution was ever realized until the foundation of YIVO in 1925. 

To summarize, the planned proceedings of both conferences demonstrate several
similar goals and techniques which can be applied to any minority language
regardless of its history: 
 (a)  standardization through dictionaries, grammars, dialect atlas,
 (b)  sensitizing the population to language issues and promoting the ideas
      by the media and literature, etc.

During the course of both conferences a problem arouse specific to any
minority language: consciously selecting a dialect/language as the standard
without offending other dialects as possible claimants. This was only a small
issue at Barcelona, but proved to be a major issue at Czernowitz.

Holger Nath
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.059

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



