
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.035
July 29, 1998

1) Some remarks on language and culture (Noyekh Miller)
2) Yiddish in Israel (Lucas Bruyn)
3) Yidish in Yisroyl (Mendy Fliegler) [Moderator's note]
4) Yiddish in Israel (Miriam Isaacs)
5) Gezets letoyves yidish un ladino (Leybl Botvinik)
6) Yiddish in Canada (David Sherman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Jul 1998 10:42:19 -0400 (EDT)
From: Noyekh Miller <nmiller@mail.cc.trincoll.edu>
Subject: Some remarks on language and culture

A recent number of Mendele (8.032) deals with an important and vexing
problem: the continuing foot dragging on the part of Israel's apparatchiks,
hacks and farbisene Rock Hebrews (as my sons called them when children) to
honor the Knesset's committment to support the teaching of Yiddish.  I'm
grateful--Im sure most of us are--for the steady, persistent way the
stalwarts of Yiddish, particularly Leybl Botvinik, have gone about their
work.  We owe them not only gratitude, but support. 

But there's a discordant note as well in Sylvia Schildt's comment that

     es iz nit genug zikh amuzirn mit zikhroynes fun petsha un heyse
     diskusyes vegn shoyresh fun vort "davenen" -- yidish shprakh, 
     kultur un literatur muzn vayter lebn un shafn.

Aside from the gratuitous condescending swipe at mere amusement-seekers,
there is embedded here a very dubious assumption that needs answering. Here
are my two cents. 

Yiddish etymology is not for everyone.  Neither is comparative grammar.  Nor,
nebekh, fiction or song or poetry or folklore.  Yet all of these are ways
whereby, depending on our individual tastes and capacities, we deepen and add
to our present by forging links with the past. 

Many links, not one.  The conceit of a Golden Chain (pace Sutzkever et al.),
a notion that relies on a 19th Century hierarchical view of Jewish life, no
longer works.  The tradition of Ashkenaz consists of shiny chains, rusty
chains, broken chains, frayed ropes, bendlekh, fragile threads.  _Everyone_
who engages in improving his/her ties to the past makes not only her/his
present more meaningful but ours as well.  The culture of Ashkenaz, like that
of any living culture, is a lot more inclusive than a class-based "kultur". 
As a blind poet might have written (but didn't), they also serve who only sit
and tell jokes. 

I mean that to be taken seriously.  The culture of my shtetl is the product
of interaction among rabonim, kleyn-shtetldike meshumodim, badkhonim,
revolutionaries, kortn-shpiler, balebatim, vaser-treger, mark-zitserkes,
those who lived behind hoyekhe fenster and those who lived in basements,
gaboim and allied turkeys, kahalishe ganovim and proste garden-variety
ganovim.  We know this, paradoxically, from our high culture, from Mendele,
Peretz, Asch, the brothers Singer, Der Nister.  That is why, I think, we all
learn even from those contributions which as such interest us least
individually but which by their variety and range enlarge our understanding. 
Stendhal, a hero of mine, dedicated one of his novels "To the Happy Few".  At
the risk of being accused of complacency and self-congratulation I believe
that all of us in Mendele constitute a happy few.  Our very diversity
enriches us all. 

Finally, I suspect that most of us cherish Yiddish for instrumental as well
as sentimental reasons but not as an end in itself.  Yiddish as such is just
another language; it's the incredibly complex tradition that goes with it
that makes it so important to us.  Our thousand-year old tradition is what
really matters, not its frame. 

So we should by all means support and even get involved in the Israeli
matter.  But we have to be on guard that sober zeal not turn into shrill
zealotry. 

Noyekh Miller

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 25 Jul 1998 11:39:41 -0400 (EDT)
From: Marion Troia <troia@wxs.nl>
Subject: Yiddish in Israel 

Re: Yiddish in Israel (Vol. 08.032).  Answer to the reactions of Sholem
Berger and Sylvia Schildt to my protest against mobilising all Mendelists
against the Israeli Knesset. 

With resolution 6 of the Conference of the World Council for Yiddish Culture
in mind I would like to make the following marginal notes: 

Sholem Berger is of course correct pointing out that Israeli language policy
is a literary or linguistic issue and not just a matter of politics. I would
think that the Knesset was in the first place answerable to the Israeli
people. If the Knesset does not enforce a law of its own making and the
people of Israel have no means to demand enforcement, there might be
something wrong with the democratic system as a whole. I cannot judge from
behind my computer whether that is the case and I don't think it is my
concern, unless Israeli (pro Yiddish) action groups ask for my support.  The
Mendele list is an international forum, not exclusively Jewish and can, in my
opinion, not be used as a political pressure group without prior notice of
the list's shames. 

Even if I am wrong about this, I wonder what the impact on the Knesset could
be if Sholem Berger is already convinced that the Mendelist could not
possibly have any impact on the policies of organisations dedicated to
Yiddish only, such as the YIVO or the Sholom Aleichem Memorial Foundation. 

I do underwrite Sylvia Schildt's well voiced concerns.  Living in a part of
the Netherlands where a minority language is spoken, namely Frisian I am a
bit doubtful about the importance of laws and funds for the survival of a
language. Frisian has over the years acquired a certain legal status: It is
taught in schools and may be used in court. Books published in Frisian are
subsidised and the language can claim money from the European Community. To
my knowledge it has not been proven that its legal status or the financial
support it receives has greatly improved its standing and quality within in
the Frisian community .  A language flourishes mainly through the enthusiasm
of its users. The Mendele list bears witness to this fact. 

Lucas Bruyn.

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 24 Jul 1998 11:56:18 -0400 (EDT)
From: emms2@juno.com (marilyn j fliegler)
Subject: Yidish in Yisroyl

Es dakht zikh mir az es iz shoyn tsayt epes oyftsutin vegn di khevre in
Knesset un der Ministeriye vus viln nisht helfn mit di gezetsn veygn Yidish
vus zay hobn aleyn geshaft.

Ikh denk az es vet geven a gute zakh az unzer shames Iosif zol shafn a
petitzie mit ale Mendelyaner mitgliders--vi fil zaynen mir-- un mir veln zikh
ale untershraybn, un efsher mer... un es shikn tsu unzer mitglider Leybl
Botvinik in Yishrul, er zol es araynbrengen un forshteln tsum Knesset... 

Men darf zey vayzn dafke, az mir zaynen Yidish-redndike Yidn... un afile di
vus zaynen nisht Yidn oykhet...Un az Yidish LEBT...un men darf es
untershtitsn... 

I think it is already time to do something about our friends in the Knesset
and the Ministry that do not want to help and implement the law about Yiddish
which they themselves created. 

I think it would be a good thing if our administrator Iosif, created a
petition for all the Mendele members to sign, as many as we are now, and we
will all sign up, and maybe more, and send it to our Israel representative
Leybl Botvinik, so that he can bring it and present it to the Knesset in
person. 

They have to be shown, in spite of everything, that we are Yiddish speaking
Jews,( and even those who aren't Jews), that Yiddish LIVES, and it must be
supported. 

It may be useful to have a copy available for signing at the 5th
International Yiddish Clubs Conference, also. This will be in UCLA, Los
Angeles at the end of August. 

Put my name on the petition for Israel to provide fiscal support and
furtherance of Yiddish in Israel. 

Ha'Levay...
Mendy Fliegler       

[Moderator's note:  Your poor shames is confused... Lucas Bruyn beleives that
the shames should not allow to discuss anything that can be construed as "a
political pressure", while Mendy Fliegler thinks that the shames should
immediately engage in collective correspondence with the Knesset.  Although I
did promise recently [08.006] to lead a brigade of Mendelyaner to Jerusalem
to help Yiddish causes, I did not expect to be taken up on this offer so
soon. Perhaps I should reconsider my options for a political leadership. 
Meanwhile, Mendele remains a discussion forum dedicated to Yiddish. The
authors of the postings are solely responsible for the content of their
letters. Mendele does not necessarily endorse or share views and opinions
expressed in the postings. Editorial decisions are based mainly on the
relevance of contributions to the scope of Mendele (Yiddish language,
literature, and culture).      - i.v.]

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 24 Jul 1998 14:07:59 -0400 (EDT)
From: miriam isaacs <misaacs@wam.umd.edu>
Subject: Yiddish in Israel

I would like to underscore Sylvia Schildt's call for voicing concern over the
fact that Yiddish was not funded in Israel. I was at the same conference she
attended, and one of the most powerful memories that stayed with me was the
high level of "fardrus" felt by the many writers, poets, working people- all
of whom shared a love for Yiddish and knew that any efforts to function
politically on their part would be met my the Jewish public in Israel with
ridicule. S'tut vey. This was underscored for me at Yad VaShem when the
person in the Hall of Names who boasted Yiddish as one of his languages on
his name tag-one Yosef Shakhter, told me, when I spoke to him in Yiddish that
he didn't have time for me and that I should speak English. He then refused
to serve me when I tried to retrieve the names of my own relatives that were
listed there. However it is that attitudes towards languages are established,
there needs to be some strong-and poltical communication. 

Miriam Isaacs

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 28 Jul 1998 12:40:54 -0400 (EDT)
From: Leybl Botwinik <LEYBLB@Amdocs.com>
Subject: Gezets letoyves yidish un ladino

In mendele V08.034, fregt dovid braun vegn dem kneset gezets fun merts 1996
letoyves yidish un ladino.  Vegn dem, kent ir gefinen mer protim in di
mendele arkhivn, fun merts 1996 (zet mendele V05.284).  Er fregt oykh, vegn
di hiskhayvesn un vos hot di ladino komisye bakumen.  Ikh vel prubirn entfern
oyf vi vayt ikh ken di protim. 

Dos gezets bafulmekhtikt dem bildungs ministeryum tsunoyftsurufn 21
forshteyers fun farshidene organizatsyes un institutsyes. Fun zey, zaynen nor
7 ofitsyel yidish-yidishe. Lemoshl, faran in der reshime a forshteyer funem
ministeryum. Loytn gezets, ken men tsutshepen an araber vos iz tetik in di
yisroyl-arabishe shuln... vayter, forshteyers fun der akademye (dos kenen
zayn mediker, arkheologn, matematikers, sport-lerers fun oyfheybn vog...) --
es shteyt nit befeyresh geshribn "vos farnemen zikh mit yidish..."  Un azoy
vayter... es shteyt oykh nit, az zey darfn kenen yidish, oder az di zitsungen
veln vern gefirt oyf yidish... 

Ober lomir zayn optimistish. Me ken zikh forshteln, az m'et ye gefinen di
pasike 'forshteyers'. Vi es zol nit zayn, vert inem gezets dokument ye
dermont dem farnem fun der arbet: flegn, shtarkn, farshpreytn yidish.  Far
dem vet zayn a budzhet. Der ministeryum vet bashtimen a forzitser un a
batsoltn ongeshteltn. Der ongeshtelter vet adurkhfirn di tog-teglekhe arbet. 

Biz aher, bashrayb ikh vos ikh veys vegn dem gezets far yidish. Me hot mir
gezogt, az far ladino iz merveyniker dos zelbe. Der ladino komisye
funktsyonirt shoyn. Zey hobn bakumen dem yor a budzhet fun 1,500,000 shkolim,
an erekh a halb milyon dolar. A byuro (telfon, tishn, ...) iz shoyn do. Tsi
dos iz bazunder tsugeshtelt gevorn funem ministeryum, oder dos vert
oysgehaltn a dank di budzhet gelt, hob ikh keyn anung nit. Ober tetikeytn
zaynen shoyn faran. 

Yidish darf oykh bakumen 1.5 milyon shkolim. Vegn byuro veys ikh nit.  Tsi di
gehalt fun dem ongeshteltn kumt fun di 1.5 milyon, veys ikh oykh nit. Di gelt
far dem yor iz shoyn nito (far yidish), un iz geshpendet gevorn oyf andere
zakhn (efsher oykh far yidish...). Oyb di komisye vet in tsayt nit
oyfgeshtelt vern, veln mir farlirn di gelt far iberayor oykh. 

Ikh hof, az dos hot geentfert oyf dovids frages.

Leybl botvinik,
netanya

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Jul 1998 01:34:56 -0400
From: "David M. Sherman" <dmsherman@shaw.wave.ca>
Subject: Yiddish in Canada

A brief comment on Fishl Kutner's observations about "key people keenly
fostering Yiddish" in Canada. I won't disagree with Fishl's numbers, but of
course there are many seniors who aren't doing any active "fostering" of
Yiddish but who do turn out in significant numbers to Yiddish activities such
as concerts. I'm not sure why Fishl wouldn't count such people on his lists. 

Regarding the transfer from Montreal to Toronto of the "Yiddish cultural
centre"  of Canada, this is a reflection of the same transfer that has taken
place over a 22-year period for the Jewish community as a whole, and
understanding it requires some understanding of Canadian politics. Ever since
a separatist Parti Quebecois government was first elected in 1976 in Quebec
(the province of which Montreal is the largest city), a steady migration of
the Jewish community has occurred, especially among the anglophone (i.e.,
English- rather than French-speaking at home) Jews, which the Yiddish
speakers primarily are.  (Sephardim who are francophone are to some extent
more comfortable with the enforced use of French in Quebec and the general
denigration of things English -- though I doubt that they are very
comfortable with the racist nationalism of certain parts of the government
including the former premier. The PQ government is still seeking to win a
third provincial referendum on unilateral secession from Canada, having lost
twice, including the 1995 referendum loss which the premier publicly blamed
on "ethnics" and "money"... you can guess what that is code for. But I
digress.) 

The migration has been almost entirely to Toronto, and the result has been
that Toronto is now clearly established as the Jewish capital of Canada. (I
believe the Jewish population of the Greater Toronto Area is about 175,000
now.) 

Regarding Vancouver and Winnipeg: again, Fishl's comments reflect these
communities as a whole. Winnipeg is an old, long-established Jewish community
going way back to the early Jewish farmers on the prairies. But over the last
generation it's lost a large chunk of the community; it's still viable but
fading. I know lots of people *from* Winnipeg but I've never heard of anyone
moving *to* Winnipeg. Vancouver, on the other hand, is a young and growing
community in a generally prosperous city with a nice climate. 

The only other cities where Jewish life is growing, and which thus might show
up in Fishl's numbers, are Calgary and (to a lesser extent) Edmonton, where
because of the booming provincial (Alberta) economy there's been significant
growth generally, and the Jewish communities have followed. 

David Sherman
Toronto
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.035

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



