
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language

______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.099
December 14, 1998

1) Avrom Reisens khanuke lid (Iosif Vaisman)
2) Introduction (Khane (Ane) Kleine)
3) Translation of Itzik Fefer's poem (Ida Selavan-Schwarcz)
4) Sholem Aleichem's life-affirming love for Yiddish (Louis Fridhandler)
5) Dialects and Argots (Arre Komar)
6) Haredish Yidish (Miriam Isaacs)
7) borrowed words in Yiddish (Joachim Neugroschel)
8) Prof. Dwosie Bilik O'H, tzu ir ershtn yortzeit (Herman Taube)
9) Latkes (Bob Rothstein)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 13 Dec 1998 13:56:37 -0500 (EST)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: s'iz nokh epes do (Avrom Reisens khanuke lid)

                borukh ate, zingt der tate
                un er tsindt di likht.
                un di shtraln, milde faln.
                af zayn blas gezikht.

                un a fayer, heylik, tayer
                in di oygn laykht.
                un der mider mit di glider
                hot zikh oysgeglaykht.

                un es dakht zikh un es trakht zikh:
                s'iz nokh epes do,
                s'iz geblibn vos tsu libn,
                heylik iz di sho.

                alte klangen, lang fargangen,
                neyn, s'klingt nokh atsind.
                zing zhe, tate, borukh ate,
                un ikh blayb dayn kind.

                                Avrom Reisen

A freylekhn yontev!

Iosif Vaisman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 04:18:01 -0500 (EST)
From: "Kleine Ane" <KLEINE@uni-trier.de>
Subject: Bakenen

Sholem aleykhem,

vi bald men iz do farbetn tsu gebn an araynfir ver me iz un fun
vanen 
un fun vos... bin ikh moyde, az haynt hob ikh zikh take farshribn 
oyf der mendele-list untern nomen Ane Kleine. arbetn arbet ikh
inem 
yidishn opteyl (universitet fun Trier) in a proyekt, vos es vert 
ongefirt fun Prof. Dr. Erika Timm, un vu mir farnemen zikh mit a 
mayrev-yidishn ksav-yad fun 16. yorhundert (a mayse-bukh
ksav-yad). 
akhuts dem arbet ikh inem foentishn opteyl oyf nokh a yidishn
inyen: 
mizrekh-yidishe fonetik; mit instrumental-fonetishe analizn git
men 
do a frishn kuk oyfn akustishen tsad funem geredtn yidish. 
mit hartsike grusn 

Khane (Ane) Kleine.

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 9 Dec 1998 10:50:28 -0500 (EST)
From: Yosef & Ida Schwarcz <idayosef@netvision.net.il>
Subject: Itzik Feffer

There has been a spate of letters to Mendele about Itzik Feffer's "
A
Wedding in Birobidjan."  Today, while organizing my Yiddish
books, I came
across a photocopy of a translation into English of this poem, by
S.S.L.
There is no date or source on the page, except for a printers'
union "bug"
numbered 309. If anyone knows who this mysterious translator
is, and where
this translation appeared, please let me know. 

Sincerely,
Ida Selavan-Schwarcz

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 00:43:05 -0500 (EST)
From: Lfridhan@aol.com
Subject: Sholem Aleichem's life-affirming love for Yiddish

Az me hert, az me leyent a geshmak por verter af yidish vert
men bashonken
mit a shtik gezunt un lebn.  Hearing or reading a hearty bit of
Yiddish
endows one with a health-giving spirit of liveliness.  The
anecdote below
illustrates, I think, a contrast between enthusiasts for Yiddish and
the
naysayers. 

Despite having recently suffered a life-threatening episode of
acute
pulmonary hemorrhagic tuberculosis, Sholem Aleichem
overflowed with
enthusiasm and love for Yiddish in 1908.  I.D. Berkowitz told a
story
illustrating Sholem Aleichem's contagious"yidishkeyt" with which
he drew
into "yidishkeyt" a fellow Jew who had disconnected from Jewish
life and
concepts.  I set this life-affirming "yidishkeyt" as a stark contrast
against the attitudes of right-wingers (e.g. at National Review or
Harvard)
who insist (in the face of contrary evidence) that Yiddish neither
has nor
deserves relevance, neither has nor even deserves life.  First, I
want to
set a philosophical basis, posited by Erich Fromm, on which to
draw the
contrast. 

Erich Fromm, in more than one of his thought-provoking books,
claimed to
recognize two opposing tendencies in people.  I won't trace his
(to my mind,
convincing) rationale, but these are his intriguing classifications:
people
are buffeted by opposing inner trends: by a biophilous
(life-loving)
tendency in opposition to a simultaneous necrophilous
(death-loving)
tendency.  He draws many examples and stresses that no human
being is
controlled solely by either tendency.  However, one or the other
may
dominate.  The creative are biophilous, the destructive are
necrophilous. 
In my opinion, authoritarian right-wingers tend to be
overwhelmed by
destructive rather than creative trends. 

Sholem Aleichem was one of the most creative individuals in our
history,
Jewish or not.  He was recuperating in a sanatorium on the
Italian Riviera. 
His physician, Dr. Mandelberg, became his friend and
companion.  While
taking a walk on the marina, they engaged in mutually
stimulating
conversations.  Now, I'll let Berkowitz tell the story: 

[English follows] 

Beyde hobn gehat eyner afn andern a gute virkung.  D"r
Mandelberg hot
gevirkt af Sholem-Aleykhemen tsum gutn mit zayn
medetsinisher oyfzikht un
hot im a sakh mitgeholfn baytsukumen zayn sharfn tsushtand fun
zayn
krankeyt; un Sholem-Aleykhem hot gevirkt af Mandelberg, er zol
zikh onheybn
interesirn mit yidn un mit yidishe problemen.  Biz yenem vinter
hot D"r
Mandelberg fun yidishkeyt keyn shum bagrif nit gehat.  Fun
yidishe shrayber
hot er efsher gehert nor dem eyn nomen Sholem-Aleykhem - un
oykh dos nor
derfar, vayl Sholem-Aleykhem iz geven a Kiever.  Ikh gedenk, vi
azoy
Sholem-Aleykhem hot eynmol, shpatsirnkik af der marina,
maysterhaft
iberdertseylt far Mandelberg Perets's folkstimlikhe geshikhte
"Dray
Matones", un zayn tsuherer hot mit ekhter "goyisher"
bagaysterung gegaft: 
azelkhe sheyne shrayber farmogn di yidn!...  Ikh vel nit zogn, az
Sholem-Aleykhem hot zayn asimilirtn doctor bakert tsu
yidishkeyt; 
Sholem-Aleykhem hot beteyve nit lib gehat di arbet fun khapn
neshomes.  Er
hot ober farzeyt dos ershte kerndl fun yidishn bavustzayn, un dos
hot
gegreykht azoy vayt, az atsind zitst D"r Mandelberg ayngebirgert
in
Tel-Aviv, redt Tel-Aviver hebreyish, un iz der hoypt doctor fun
der arbeter-
klinik "kupat kholim." (Undzere Rishoynim, fun Y.D. Berkowitz,
3: 189-190,
Hamenorah, Tel-Aviv, 1966.)

Each affected the other to the good: Dr. Mandelbertg with
medical
supervision helped Sholem Aleichem withstand his severe illness;
and Sholem
Aleichem made Mandelberg begin to take an interest in Jews and
Jewish
problems.  Until that winter, Dr. Mandelberg had not any
conception of
Jewishness. He had possibly heard of only one Jewish writer,
Sholem
Aleichem, and only because Sholem Aleichem was from Kiev.  I
remember how
once Sholem Aleichem, taking a walk on the marina, masterfully
related
Peretz's popular story, "Three Gifts," to Mandelberg, and his
listener, with
genuine "goyish" enthusiasm reacted with awe: Jews have fine
writers like
this among them!...  I will not claim that Sholem Aleichem
turned his
assimilated doctor back to Jewishness: Sholem Aleichem did not
by nature
like to ensnare souls.  However, he sowed the first kernels of
Jewish
consciousness, and this reached so far that today [Berkowitz
probably wrote
this in 1931. L.F.] Dr. Mandelberg is a citizen of Tel-Aviv, speaks
Hebrew,
Tel-Aviv style, and is head physician in the workers' free clinic.  *
* *
Yiddish even then was called "irrelevant" and "dead or dying" by
some. 
Still, Sholem Aleichem struck up the spark of yidishkeyt in
another by
invoking Jewish creativity in Yiddish.  Any who know some
Yiddish, and pay
more attention to the life in themselves, rather than the decay,
know full
well that this is still going on. 

Louis Fridhandler

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 10 Dec 1998 19:11:24 -0500 (EST)
From: Arthur Komar <komar@suhep.phy.syr.edu>
Subject: Dialects and Argots

There seems to be some controversy lately about YIVO Yiddish
vs. dialects
vs. haredi argots, as if there is just one correct way for a living
language
to survive. Dead languages such as Latin or Classic Greek don't
have such
problems. Is that what we really want for a living Yiddish? Of
course a
living, cultured language should not only have a beautiful, classic
literature, but should have the possibility of evolving throuhg
regionalisms, dialects and yes, even hodgepodge street argots.
Rather than
mourn the haredi Yinglish-Yiddish we should cheer it. It does not
detract
from the classic culture but rather proves that Yiddish, unlike
Latin, is a
living language and an evolving culture.

I was very moved by the beauty of the Arn Vergelis poem "Dos
Land
Birobidzhan". Even though written in the Soviet Yiddish dialect
rather than
in YIVO, it is clearly in the main stream of world literary culture.
The
subtle allusion that it makes to Goethe's "Kenst du das Land Wo
die Citronen
Bluhen" adds to its exquisite piquency. Yes, works like this keep
Yiddish a
living language also. There is no need to mourn or ventilate or to
apologize. There is much to rejoice. And as for di sonim, mir
hobn zey in
bod!

Arre Komar

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 14 Dec 1998 12:17:20 -0500 (EST)
From: miriam isaacs <misaacs@wam.umd.edu>
Subject: Haredish Yidish

Es iz gut tsu leynen az men geyt bezukhn di vos redn Yidish in
hasidishe
gegntn. Un men hot nisht keyn moyre afile. Un men darf amol
take leynt voz
zey shraybn. Ikh vil nor bamerkn vegn vos Refoyl Finkl hot
geshribn. Er
tsaygt az (zayer) zeyer geshribn Yidish- in Monsi, iz dokh gor
andersh fun
klal Yidish. Er bamerkt oykh az s'iz nisht, vi a sakh mentshn hobn
lib tsu
zogn -a tsebrokhn Yidish- bloyz an ander Yidish. Un vi mit ale
dialektn, iz
es amol mer enlikh tsu datsh, amol nisht. Un men darf visn az
datsh hot oykh
ire dialektn. Di lange sheyne liste vos er hot gegebn iz nisht nor
an
untershid tsvishn klal "in zayer" dialekt, nor a sakh mer
komplitsiert. Men
ken zikh, af Yidish, oysdrikn in farshidene vegn un es iz nisht
azoy glat-
havdole tsu makn -klal oder nisht klal- vayl klal aleyn iz oykh a
gemishte
kashe.
 
For those who are learners of Yiddish and saw Refoyl Finkl's
lovely list of
klal versus Hasidic -Monsey- Yiddish I just want to point out that
the
differences are not quite so simple. Yiddish possesses a rich
vocabulary
that varies somewhat by dialect. Similarity to German is
sometimes a
function of dialect and sometimes a function of borrowing-
resulting in what
is known as Daytshmerish. 

His lists only show how much more dictionary and thesaurus
work is needed. 
 
Miriam Isaacs

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 11 Dec 1998 17:33:21 -0500 (EST)
From: ACHIM1 <Achim1@cris.com>
Subject: borrowed words in Yiddish

Bruce claims (08.097) that the Yiddish word "aynfarshtendik" is a
German
word. it's not.  The German word for "maskim" ("agreed") is
"einverstanden." 
There's also a specifically Austrian term:  "einverstaendlich"--
"By mutual
consent."  The Yiddish word "eynfarshtendik" is obviously of
German origin,
and its form either derives from a German dialect or was recast
in Yiddish.
There are countless examples of such Yiddish revisions of
borrowed words:
e.g. "Gezelnshaft" along with "gezelshaft"  (from German
"Gesellschaft"),
etc. 
        
Given the fact that the form of "aynfarshtendik" seems unique to
Yiddish, I
think we can grant it droit de cite'rather than stigmatizing it as
"daytshmerish." 
                                
Joachim Neugroschel
        
P.S. an intriguing example of what happens to some Polish words
in Yiddish: 
the Polish idiom "prosto za mostu" (literally:  "straight from the
bridge')
meaning "straight from the shoulder."  In Yiddish it becomes "a
proster-zmoster yid" = "A guy who shoots straight from the hip."

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 12 Dec 1998 16:05:33 -0500 (EST)
From: HTaube218@aol.com
Subject: Prof. Dwosie Bilik O'H, Tzu ir ershtn yortzeit

Sof December falt oys di ershte yortzait fun Professor Dwosie
(Dorothy)
Bilik, velche iz far di letzte twontzig yor geven lererin fun Yiddish,
Yiddishe literatur un Churban-literatur in Maryland Universitet. Ir
buch
vegn di churban-geratevete Yiddishe shraibers un zajer ajnflus
oyf der
Americaner literatur, iz brait farshprait gevorn in akademishe
kraizn un iz
genutzt gevorn fun forshers un lerers in uptailungen fun chuban
studies. 
Far gantze tzwantzig yor iz zi geven gehilf-professor un professor
in dem
Department fun Slavishe un Germanishe shprachn baim
universitet. Zi hot
ungefirt mit seminarn, redagirt visenshaftleche ziurnaln un
aingeordnt
literarishe collokiums, bai velche es zenen oyfgetroYiddish
shraiber un
barimte lektiorn. 

Dorothy hot dertzoign a dor Yiddish-lerers un Yiddish-libhubers,
mechabrim
fun bicher, velche farnemen hain vichtike pozitzies in
universitetn, shulen
in un arum Washington.  Ven Dorothy iz pluzling krank gevorn un
zich
genoytigt in upruh hot der shraiber fun di shures ubergenumen
ire klassn in
"Maryland University". Ich muz eidis zogn, az aza libshaft un
derech-eretz
tzu a lererin hob ich, in main Amerikaner derfarung als a lerer,
keinmol
nisht gezen.  Dorothy hot gefilt an oysergevainleche libshaft
tzum Yiddishn
lied, Yiddishe poezie un folks-tentz. Zi hot di liebshaft
ubergetrogn tzu
ire studentn. Noc ire sho'en in klass, flegt zi blaibn in ir biure un
helfn
di studentn tzugraitn zaire disertatzies.  Ire artiklen vegn Yaakov
Glatshtain, Yitzchak Bashevis-Singer, froyen in der Yiddisher
literatur, ir
"liebling"  Sholem Aleichem un Gluckel-of-Hameln zenen gedrukt
gevorn in
literarishe tzitshriftn in Amerike un in oisland.  Dvosie Bilik iz
oyfgevaksn in a progresiver (Bundisher) heim in Brooklyn, N.Y.
Yiddish iz
far ir geven a gaistige religie, tzu velche zi hot zich gevidmet mit
alle
fiebern fun ir neshome un hartz. Zi hor gehofn der "Amerikaner
Komissie
vegon Churben Europe", die "Natzionale Endowment far di
Humanities"  un frai
gegebn ir tzait als Presidentn fun "Amerikaner Farband fun
Yiddishe
Professrn".  Ire interesn un talantn zenen geven farshednartike:
Zi iz geven
a lererin, zingerin, tentzerin, a sheferishe shraiberin, redaktorin
un, di
hoyptzach, a zeltn- vareme froy un mentsch mit a tifn interes tzu
altz vos
hot gehat a shaichus tzu Yiddish. 

Ir langyoriker frait un kolege in Maryland Universitet, der faleger
fun
"Driad Press", poet un redaktor Merrill Leffler, hor gevidmet a
poeme tzu
Dorothy Bilik un zi forgelaint bei dem Ondenk Farzamlung,
gevidmet Dorothy,
tzu di Shlyshim fun ir plutzimdikn avekgein in bliendn elter fun 69
yor.. 
Zi hot ongezogt in ir tzavo'e az men zol noch ir nisht wainen:
"Zol a
klezmer kapelie' oder a zingerin shpiln un zingen Yiddishe lieder
un zol der
oylem tantzn... vaizn der welt, az afile ven lerers gayen avek,
blaibt iber
zajer gaistike yerushe-- dos Yiddishe wort, Yiddish gezanr un
muzik"...  Bai
der hazkore noch Dorothy Bilik zenn di professorn un ire
talmidim
nochgekumen ir farlang: es zenen gezungen gevorn bloiz
Yiddishe lider.  Mir,
ire fraint, kolegen un talmidim, demonen mit koved dem ershtn
yortzaitfun a
balibter Yiddish lererin. 

("Der Onheib"  Fall-Number 27)

Herman Taube

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 13 Dec 1998 12:17:56 -0500 (EST)
From: ROBERT A ROTHSTEIN <rar@slavic.umass.edu>
Subject: Latkes

Mathew Goodman's column on latkes in the December 4th issue
of the English
_Forward_ provokes two comments.  First, _pace_ Mr.
Goodman, the Yiddish
term _latke_ is probably not "derive[d] from the Russian word
meaning
'pancakes'" since Slavicisms in Yiddish are more often from
Ukrainian,
Belarusian or Polish (the languages among whose speakers Jews
lived) than
from Russian.  In this particular case, the Russian word is
_olad'ia_, while
Ukrainian has _oladka_ and Belarusian, _aladka_.
        
The second comment is actually a question.  Mr. Goodman
quotes the beginning
of Mani Leyb's poem "Christmas" ("Nitl"), apparently in the
translation by
John Hollander that was published in the Howe/Wisse/ Shmeruk
_Penguin Book
of Modern Yiddish Verse_.  Do more competent readers than I of
Yiddish
poetry agree that Hollander misunderstood the first line?  Here
are the
first lines of the original and the translation:

        Di nakht vekt oyf dos kuper fun di glokn.
        Mit falken, frost un vayrekh vakht di shtot:
        fun toyt shteyt oyf mit fridn zeyer got.
        Un makhnes trogn oyf a hoykhn flokn

        zayn dmus...

        The bronze of bells aroused by the night sky,
        The town has frost, flares, incense on its breath;
        Their God arises joyfully from death
        And the crowds carry, on a pole on high,

        His image...
        
On my reading "di nakht" is the object of the first sentence; the
subject is
"dos kuper fun di glokn."  To be sure, the line is syntactically
ambiguous
since feminine and neuter nouns do not distinguish nominative
and
accusative, but I am strengthened in my belief by the fact that
the subjects
of the second and third sentences are also at the end of their
respective
lines.  My reading also seems to me to make better sense, but I
am wary of
imposing prosaic standards on poetry.  What do other readers
think? 
                
Bob Rothstein

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.099

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



