
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.089
November 27, 1998

1) Klinghoffer on Yiddish (Norman Guzick) [Moderator's note]
2) Regarding comments about Ruth Wisse (Gennady Estraikh)
3) Ellen Prince and my "summer school class" (Gail Gaston)
4) a toyte shprakh (Benyomin Moss)
5) If you want, Yiddish is dead. If not, also good. (Ruvn Millman)
6) The "Death" of Yiddish (Hershl Hartman)
7) Ellen Prince/Ruth Wisse (Bruce Mitchell)
8) A nomen (Mendy Fliegler)
9) sports names (Doodie (David) Ringelblum)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 9 Nov 1998 00:23:31 -0500 (EST)
From: NGUZICK@aol.com
Subject: Klinghoffer on Yiddish

[Moderator's note: This message was submitted to Mendele by Norman
Guzick
almost three weeks ago. I was not sure whether it should be posted for
several reasons. One of them is that it is very difficult to avoid
loshn-hore in commenting on such materials.  Another -- Mendele tries (if
not always successfully) to maintain certain standards on what can be
quoted. Today, if one searched the web for the word "Yiddish", sadly
enough,
a sizable portion of the results would come from the sites of assorted
"national-patriots", Holocaust revisionists and neo-nazis of every stripe. 
Although they do discuss various aspects of Yiddish, it does not mean that
we should repost their delirious drivel. Such junk does not become any
cleaner when it is printed in the respectable pages of the Wall Street
Journal. The author of this sample, David Klinghoffer, is not a novice in a
crusade to protect the Jews from the "obsessive ethnic Jewishness" and
"obsessive Holocaust veneration", while at the same time protecting the
Christian Right from the Jewish "notorious attack" based on their
"preoccupation with phantom anti-Semitism"  (see e.g. Mr. Klinghoffer's
article in "Books & Culture. A Christian Review", v.4, no.1, 1998 or a
number of his columns in "National Review").  However, the material
quoted
below is a standout even among his creative writings. I made up my mind
about posting it to Mendele after reading some entries to our ongoing
discussion on the death of Yiddish. It is difficult to imagine a better
illustration of how easily seemingly serious academic constructs can be
reduced to ugly and absurd ideological proclamations.  Somehow I believe
that one day Mr. Klinghoffer will become ashamed that he produced and
published this ignorant piece. Meanwhile, with friends like Klinghoffer,
Yiddishists on the right hardly need any enemies.  -Iosif Vaisman]


I am a "lurker" on the Mendele list. My interest in the subject of Yiddish
is greater than my ability in the language. I wanted to submit some quotes
from a column from this past Friday's (November 6) Wall Street Journal.
Each
Friday in the WSJ's Weekend section they publish a religion column called
"Houses of Worship." This Friday, the column was on the subject of Yiddish
by David Klinghoffer. He is identified as an editor of National Review and
apparently has become Orthodox recently. I think the article is not only
replete with errors about Yiddish but -- more importantly -- reflects an
interpretation of the relationship between the Yiddish language and the
Jewish religion that is terribly perverse. A better scholar and writer than
I needs to respond to Klinghoffer's diatribe.  I hope this submission will
stimulate a fellow Mendele reader to do so.

Norman D. Guzick
Houston, Texas

------------------------
SCHUMER'S YIDDISH LESSON (WSJ, Nov 6, 1998, p.15)
By David Klinghoffer
...
Once the lingua franca of Eastern European Jewry, Yiddish arose in
medieval
Germany as a melange of German, Hebrew and Aramaic. Speakers of
English owe
it a great debt. We would be at a loss without untranslatable words like
"schmuck," "mensch" and "schmaltz". 
...
At universities, the study of Yiddish is lately regarded as a highly serious
endeavor. Harvard endowed a chair, while other colleges have created
Yiddish
faculty positions of their own: Ohio State, UCLA, UC Berkeley and the
Universities of Michigan and Texas. Adult-education classes also
proliferate, drawing young and old, not least homosexuals, whose
community
has developed an affection for the language. Yet despite all this
enthusiasm, there are reasons not to love Yiddish.

>From the mouths of native speakers, it sounds like German, neither
beautiful
nor ugly. On the other hand, many amateur Yiddish fanciers, dropping
phrases
in English conversation, apply a thick layer of cutesy-poo relish to its
pronunciation, in an exaggerated attempt at authenticity. The result can be
aesthetically problematic.

That's the least of it, though. In the minds of certain fanciers, Yiddish is
the embodiment of all things authentically Jewish. Thus some Jews of
Spanish
and North African ancestry regard its exaltation as a form of bigotry. 

More revealing is the fondness for Yiddish among gays. For many Jews,
gay
and straight, what attracts in Yiddish is its very deadness, at least
compared with 60 years ago. They find it comforting to think of Jewishness
and Judaism as an object in a museum of antiquities, surrounded by
nostalgia, implying no divine displeasure if we, say, eat non-kosher food,
marry gentiles or do whatever gays do.

For others, the attraction is similar in its trumpeting of liberation from
God. Yiddish is the tribal language of Eastern European Jews, rather than
their holy tongue, which is Hebrew. Jews have never entirely resolved the
question of whether we are a tribe or a religion. In rabbinic thinking, we
are a religion grafted onto a tribe, the tribe possessing zero intrinsic
importance without the religion. But in the view of tribalists, who number
disproportionately among Yiddish fanciers, the religion forms a mere
appendage of the ethnic group, our ancestral faith being little better than
an, adorable myth, adaptable at will to the needs of Jewish "culture." 
...
Embodied in Yiddish as one often hears it today, the tribal, secular view of
Jewishness really is a slur. 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 18 Nov 1998 04:53:48 -0500 (EST)
From: yiddishstudies <yiddishstudies@oxf-inst.demon.co.uk>
Subject: Regarding comments about Ruth Wisse

Ikh bin zikher az Ruth Wisse neytikt zikh nit me zol zi farteydikn (ir
akademishe reputatsye iz di beste "farteydikung"). Bifrat nokh az ale onfaln
af ir dernomen in an altn anekdot: 
a malpe zogt a ferd: "arbet, arbet, vestu efsher oykh - vi ikh - vern a
mentsh".

Es hot af mir fun ot der "diskusye" a veye geton mit epes a bolshevistishn
vokabular, vos, lemoshl, politish aktive studentn (oder poshet karyeristn) 
hobn genutst kegn zeyere profesorn beshas dem kamf kegn kosmopolitism
un
andere "izmen". Es hot mir oykh dermont in dem impet fun der "publitsistik" 
fun "Sovetish heymland"... 

Ikh bin nit kegn, me zol diskutirn mit Ruth Wisse tsi mit andere gelernte
un shrayber. Ober me tor nit farvandlen dos alts in perzenlekhe onfaln.

Gennady Estraikh

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 18 Nov 1998 00:13:37 -0500 (EST)
From: gigi1924@webtv.net (Gail Gaston)
Subject: Ellen Prince and my "summer school class"

I would not assume to place myself on a scholastic or professional level
with Ruth Wisse, that is beyond my reach.  My only point was the  fact
that such a class exists - and at the University of Arizona - is an
indication that there is still an interest in Yiddish and there are
people who do not believe it is a dead or dying language.  I don't feel
that such a class or those attending it should be belittled or
considered inconsequential.  

Gail Gaston

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 20 Nov 1998 02:51:27 -0500 (EST)
From: Ken Moss <kmoss@leland.Stanford.EDU>
Subject: a toyte shprakh

Vey iz mir! A tsvey-dray teg zint ikh hob a kuk geton af Mendele, un yidish
iz fun haynt af morgn nifter gevorn! Ven ikh volt gevust, volt ikh haynt
nisht gehat geredt mit der khaverte af yidish -- un farshteyt zikh, visndik
az yidish iz aleya hasholem in yener velt, vel ikh botl makhn di trefung der
Shtanforder shmues-krayz vos hot gezolt forkumen iber akht teg. 

Nu, khaverim un khavertes, avade zol men nisht oplakhn fun ernste
shmuesn
iber ernste temes. Ober fun lekherlekhe kukvinklen zol men yo oplakhn.
Dos
vos Sholem Berger, unzer shamesh un andere hobn shoyn gezogt iz vi
shtendik
reyn emes: Yidish iz gornisht toyt, zi vet say vi say hobn a kiyem in di
mayler fun khsidishe kinder, un di frage far unz, vi (tsum merstns) 
nisht-khsidishe libhober fun mame-loshn iz nisht tsi vet yidish hobn a
kiyem, nor prost un poshet tsi zi vet hobn a kiyem far unz, un far der
breyterer kehile, un oyb azoy, vos far a kiyem, un nokh vikhtiker, vos kenen
mir aleyn ton ltoyves nisht nor a shprakh nor oykh a kultur vos iz unz
vikhtik. 

Benyomin Moss

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 20 Nov 1998 03:46:40 -0500 (EST)
From: Ruvn@aol.com
Subject: If you want, Yiddish is dead.  If not, also good.

Yiddish is dead?
Fine...Yiddish is dead.

Okay, nu...what can you do...mekhaye meysim zan something is what
Frankenstein does, not regular people. 

We're having a levaye. Mame-Loshn '99. We're going to celebrate Yiddish. 

Anyone who wants to come should leave us their email address and we'll
send
them details as it comes in. 

Ruvn Millman

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 20 Nov 1998 16:58:18 -0500 (EST)
From: Hershl@aol.com 
Subject: The "Death" of Yiddish 

Seems to me that, of almost all the ethnicities in the world, Jews should be
among the last to measure the "life" and "death" of a language by the
yardstick of its use in daily speech. The history of Hebrew provides proof
positive that a language used "only" for religio/cultural purposes can
survive quite nicely, thank you, even without the help of in-marriage and
populous families. 

For millennia, Hebrew was taken out of the ark along with the toyre,
chanted
without meaning for the vast majority, and returned to its shelter without a
single word having been "spoken" in the sense of use for daily, mundane
tasks, chores and/or pleasures. One did not use loshn koydesh to say
"pass
the salt,"  much less "what are you doing tonight?" 

For centuries Hebrew was the language of roots, of heritage, preserved in
this "artificial," manner.  In our time, it was revived to become a
full-fledged spoken language. 

Years ago, I propounded a theory about Hebrew and Yiddish that I know
must
be right, because 24 hours after hearing me state it informally, a prominent
professor proclaimed it from the platform, without attribution. 

I contended then and now that, in our time, Yiddish and Hebrew have
exchanged places. The former loshn koydesh (holy tongue) is now, in
Israel,
the language of daily intercourse (in all senses of the word), of commerce,
politics, criminality, military functions, etc., etc. Yiddish, on the other
hand, has assumed the mantle of loshn-hakdoyshim (tongue of the
holy--martyred--ones). 

Yiddish is the language--both in Israel and the rest of the Jewish world--of
roots, of heritage, not spoken in the street but preserved in the modern ark
of books, journals and academia (and, yes, this list). The survival strength
and power of Yiddish comes not from the ungrammatical, highly anglicized
argot babbled in Borough Park (and around Fairfax Ave. here in lotusland)
but from the "holy books" written in Yiddish to which the Jews of the 21st
century and beyond will turn to know where they came from and what
treasures
are theirs. 

[Those with an overwhelming need to proclaim, mourn (or both) the death
of a
language are advised to examine the current state of English in public
prints (even the most prestigious), popular journals and on the airwaves--to
say nothing of its parliamentary bastions.]

Hershl Hartman, 
Los Angeles

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 25 Nov 1998 08:38:04 -0500 (EST)
From: Bruce Mitchell <bmitch@sable.ox.ac.uk>
Subject: Ellen Prince/Ruth Wisse

In all due respect to Ellen Prince, I must strongly recommend that she read
my previous posting more thoroughly and consult a minimal bibliography on
the actual topic of my message (suggestions/statements that Yiddish is
dead
versus reality) before replying a second time.

Had Ellen Prince actually read my email, she would have seen that my
problem
with Ruth Wisse's work stems more from her "sociolinguistic"  essays such
as
"Is Yiddish Back from the Dead? -Shul Daze". The title alone seems to be
an
accurate enough quote of Ruth Wisse, I should think.  For a more in depth
critique, please consult my article, already included in the bibliography of
my last posting, as well as my introduction to the Yiddish articles in
"Monatshefte", Summer 1998. As for the epithet "self-professed" academic,
I
am fully aware of Ruth Wisse's position at Harvard University. My critique
of her work is that she needs to apply more academic rigor to articles
dealing with the current state of Yiddish as well as to the remarks she
makes in public interviews, especially when they do not deal with her actual
field (i.e. Yiddish literature).

I would also like to take this oppurtunity to point out that, according to
statistics, the haredi community is the only sector of the Britain's Jewish
population which is growing. This also happens to be the population which
uses YIddish most extensively, which means that the Yiddish speaking
population is the only sector of British Jewry which is growing. Yet many a
journalist and academic make announcements that Yiddish is "dying" or
"dead". At the risk of beating a dead horse, I strongly urge scholars to
consult facts before making public announcements regarding the demise or
death of Yiddish.

Bruce Mitchell
Oxford

P.S. While I recognize Ruth Wisse's sound, old-fashioned, positivistic
literary analyses, I do not appreciate her occasional subjective outbursts
such as "I am not a hasidic enthusiast" in the middle of a scholarly study.
I likewise object her brother's attempted marginalization of the haredi
community in the introduction to his book, "A Bridge of Longing". 

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 17 Nov 1998 18:16:33 -0500 (EST)
From: emms2@juno.com (mendy fliegler)
Subject: A nomen oyf a mitseyve.... 

Tayere khevre,

Unzer rebe hot mikh gefreygt tse emetser fun unz ken dem numen:
"Saltshe"  .
Er hot es gefinen oyf a mitseyve, un er hot keynmol nisht gehert fun dem
nomen...Efsher kent ir unz aroyshelfn... Es iz geshribn: samekh, alef,
lamed, tes, shin, ayin... 

A sheynem dank furoys..

(Our rabbi asked me if anyone of us knows of the name Saltshe. He found
it
on a gravestone, and had never heard of it. Maybe you can be of help.  It is
written: samekh, alef, lamed, tes, shin, ayin...  Thanks in advance.) 

What is its origin?
Mendy Fliegler 

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 19 Nov 1998 03:20:08 -0500 (EST)
From: Doodie Ringelblum <doodie@melbpc.org.au>
Subject: Other problematic sports names

In Australia we have no problems with a Yiddish word for baseball - we just
avoid the sport (though incidentally the biggest crowd to ever attend a
baseball game was in Australia). And "cricket" is simply "kriket". 

However there are many problems rendering the positions into Yiddish. Are
there any Mendelyaner (perhaps in England) who have grappled with terms
such
as "midwicket", "silly mid-off" "square-leg" and "covers". 

Another problem word is volleyball. I understand the common term is
"netzbal". But that leaves no translation for Netball which is the biggest
single sport in Australia. Many of us have taken to calling Volleball
"finger-bul" as a result, but I wonder if anyone has another solution? 

And finally softball - "Vaykh-bul"??? 

Doodie (David) Ringelblum
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.089

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html




