
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.087
November 18, 1998

1) Translations (Louis Fridhandler)
2) Ars Translationa (Marjorie Schonhaut Hirshan)
3) Translations (Hershl Hartman)
4) A book of possible interest to Mendelyaner (Larry Rosenwald)
5) translation of Prague documents (Zelda Kahan Newman) [Moderator's note]
6) dray doyres fun i. opatowska (Feygl Infeld Glezer)
7) Itzik Feffer recordings (Heynekh Sapoznik)
8) Galitzyaner cooking (Yosef Gilboa)
9) Shreib in Yiddish! (Yankel Kurtzman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 14 Nov 1998 11:40:20 -0500 (EST)
From: Lfridhan@aol.com
Subject: Translations

The recent contributions on English translation of Yiddish poetry
introduces
a welcome breath of new life.  L'khayim khevre! 

Though I have tried my hand once or twice, I have no expertise in
translation of Yiddish poetry.  However, let me float a couple of
thoughts: 

Even though a translation may be apt, the translation often only points
to
the original, it is ABOUT the original, it rarely matches it.  An absolute
match is most likely to be achieved in a technical exposition.  Der man
iz
tsugegangen tsu zayn ferd.  "The man approached his horse."  Who
can argue
with that translation?  However, suppose the Yiddish says: der man iz
tsugegangen tsu zayn ferdele.  The diminutive adds a feeling tone.  It
suggests a bond of affection.  Rendering that as "The man
approached his
little horse" would miss the point.  Accurate but wrong. 

The original (either English or Yiddish) is rendered in a tone and
rhythm
all its own, an idiosyncratic music.  That music, or an essential element
of
the music, is often lost in a translation.  Yehoash translated
Longfellow's
Hiawatha into Yiddish.  He preserved the rhythm in Yiddish but lost the
majestic tones of the English (in my opinion).  His was a massive and
valiant effort.  I am curious as to what Yiddish readers (who could not
read
the original) derived from reading Yehoash's translation. 

The point I suggest is that transmitting the feeling tones in a translation
is a huge and mostly intractable problem.  Substitutes may be found. 
Rarely, the translation is even more effective than the original.  Is it,
however, justifiable to "improve upon or punch up" the original, to bring
on
tympani and trumpet blasts?  In my opinion, sometimes yes, a cautious
yes. 
What powerful tone is inevitably missed in one phrase may sometimes
be
compensated by "punching up" the next. 

I hope we will soon read in Mendele many examples contributed by
those who
are knowledgeable in Yiddish poetry and its translation into English.
Given
the supreme importance of the English language in this world's
communication
systems, this is a most worthy discussion. 

Louis Fridhandler

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 16 Nov 1998 09:49:40 -0500 (EST)
From: SHirshan@aol.com
Subject: Ars Translationa

The fascinating Battle of the Z's

S'iz mir a khidish that the different perceptions of poetry translations
evoked so minor a skirmish on Mendele. 

In one corner, Zumoff the physician says catch and pin down the
butterfly.
Cut it open to extract its meaning. Forsooth, it must be killed to be
dissected. 

Leah Zazulyer, keensighted (unlike her namesake), says lets marvel at
its
colors, listen for its song, glide with its flight. Only by gathering all
its aspects can we arrive at the meaning of the butterfly. 

Troim Handler tells of Aaron Kramer when translating her father,
Menke
Katz's poetry. If it rhymes in the original, it must rhyme. We must
capture
mood, sounds, style, he proclaimed. All of this makes meaning. 

I cast my ballot for Aaron, Leah and Ars Poetica. 
"A poem should be palpable and mute
 As a globed fruit..
 A poem should not mean 
 But be."

Marjorie Schonhaut Hirshan
Boynton Beach, Florida    

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 16 Nov 1998 14:26:50 -0500 (EST)
From: Hershl Hartman <hershl@earthlink.net>
Subject: Translations

I've held off commenting on the ripostes to my response to Leah
Zazulyer's
post on the question of translating Yiddish poetry into English (or any
other language, I suppose), partly due to the press of other activities
and
also to allow all potential participants in the discussion to have their
say. Now, I get the feeling that it's my turn again. 

First, I'd like to thank Larry Rosenwald, Jordan Finkin, Gitl Dubrovsky,
Barnett Zumoff and Sylvia Schildt for their contributions to the
discussion,
especially since most of their comments underlined how dismally I'd
failed
to get my points across. Let me try again, more clearly, I hope: 

I am not advocating that translators of Yiddish poetry strive to retain
the
rhyme and meter of the originals to the exclusion of sense, meaning,
feeling, tone, accuracy or any of the other equally vital cited aspects of
poetry. I insist that rendering ALL those aspects PLUS rhyme and
meter is
the duty and should be the goal of Yiddish poetry translators. It's not
an
easy task. It can mean that many hours or even days are spent on a
single
verse. iz vos? (So what?) 

My concept does not stem from theory nor from any of the
distinguished
theorists cited in the discussion, from Perets to Nabokov. Rather, it
was
imposed on me by the reactions of non-Yiddish speakers in my classes
on
Yiddish literature. After reading translations of poets about whom I'd
enthused, the students admitted that they could not understand what
all my
praise was about. The poets' ideas and feelings were clear enough,
but their
skill-their genius, if you will-in putting those ideas and feelings into
metered, rhyming verses was totally absent from the translations. 

"Prosaic," after all, means just what it says. 

A word about the rehash of arguments against translation in principle
and
the demand that those who want to enjoy the richness of Yiddish
poetry
should do so by learning to read and understand Yiddish. Those
arguments-"it's impossible to truly translate Yiddish and, besides, one
shouldn't"-played a significant role, I believe, in the decline of Yiddish,
especially in North America. Denied access to knowledge of the riches
available in Yiddish literature, the children of Yiddish-speaking
immigrants
were content to think of Yiddish as a dispensable "kitchen"  language
and
nothing more. The "let 'em learn Yiddish" argument sounds to me very
much
like the merchant who insists "I've got good products-why should I
advertise?" 

As an example of what I'm trying to convey-sacrificing as little as
possible
of ALL of a poem's elements-and as a khanike gift to all Mendelyaner,
here's
Morris Rosenfeld's turn-of-the-century anthem to a secular
understanding of
the midwinter festival: 

o, ir kleyne likhtelekh/ir dertseylt geshikhtelekh/mayselekh on a tsol./ir
dertseylt fun blutikayt,/heldishkayt un mutikayt-/vunder fun amol. 

(O, you little candles bright:/Tales and legends in the night,/Legends
without an end./You tell of battles waged in blood,/Heroes who
withstood the
flood,/Courage that would not bend.) 

ven ikh ze aykh pintlendik/kumt a kholem finklendik,/redt an alter
troym:/yid, du host gekrigt amol;/yid, du host gezigt amol-/akh, dos
gloybt
zikh koym! 

(When I see you sparkling so/Ancient flames begin to glow,/There
speaks an
ancient dream:/Jew, you were a warrior once;/Jew, you were victorious
once-/O, how strange that seems!) 

Hershl Hartman

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 15 Nov 1998 16:16:54 -0500 (EST)
From: Larry Rosenwald <LROSENWALD@WELLESLEY.EDU>
Subject: A book of possible interest to Mendelyaner

I thought that some readers of this list might be interested in a book
that
recently came out from New York University Press;  it's edited by
Werner
Sollors, and called _Multilingual America: Transnationalism, Ethnicity,
and
the Languages of American Literature_.  It has a surprisingly large
amount
of material on Yiddish-language literature, and on the representation of
Yiddish in English-language literature, and the essays on these
subjects
are, in my biased opinion, excellent;  they include Matthew Frye
Jacobson's
"'The Quintessence of the Jew':  Polemics of Nationalism and
Peoplehood in
Turn-of-the-Century Yiddish Fiction";  Aviva Taubenfeld's "'Only an
"L"': 
Linguistic Borders and the Immigrant Author in Abraham Cahan's
_Yekl_ and
_Yankel der Yankee_";  Hana Wirth- Nesher's "The Languages of
Memory: 
Cynthia Ozick's _The Shawl_";  my own ( hence the bias of my
opinion) 
"American Anglophone Literature and Multilingual America";  and Jules
Chametzky's "Reflections on Multilingualism."

If you have questions, I'd be happy to answer them or forward them to 
Werner Sollors.
        
Zayt mir ale gezunt un shtark, 
Larry Rosenwald

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 15 Nov 1998 17:51:19 -0500 (EST)
From: "david newman" <dznewman@netvision.net.il>
Subject: translation of Prague documents

I've been asked to translate some documents written by one Rabbi
David
Weismandel in Prague during World War II. The documents are
purportedly in
Yidddish, but from what I can tell they are in a German-based creole
which
has been sprinkled with some whole Hebrew phrases. Native German
speakers I
know claim it is by no means German, and it certainly does not look
like any
dialect of Yiddish that I know. 
 
The papers are of some historical import.They are (from what I've been
able
to dope out) about negotiations for the possibe release of Jews from
Czechoslovakia in exchange for bribes to be given to the Germans. 
  
The youngsters now living in Prague who would like this stuff
translated
claim there is now no one in Prague who understands these
documents. I
myself find them extremely hard to crack. There is no money to be had
in
this translation; the kids who want it done are a mixed bag of
impecunious
youngsters looking for their Jewish roots. For some one who can do
this,
there is some historical interest (as well as code words, spies...) and
the
knowledge of a mitsve done in the name of furthering Jewish identity. 
  
I am willing to send a fax of one page to any one who thinks he/she
would
like to have a crack at it.  

Zelda Kahan Newman

[Moderator's note: The described texts were probably written by
Rahmad
(Rabbi Mikhoel Dov) Weissmandel (1904-1957) from Bratislava, one of
the
most prominent (and tragic) figures of Jewish spiritual resistance
during
the Holocaust. Many of his war-time writings were encoded. Some are
already
translated into Hebrew and English. For more details and further
references,
see: Abraham Fuchs, Karati ve-en `oneh : za`akato shel Rahmad
Vaismandel
bi-tekufat ha-Sho'ah / Yerushalayim : A. Fuks, 1983. 222 p.
English translation: The unheeded cry / Brooklyn : Mesora, 1984. 288
p.
-i.v.]

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 15 Nov 1998 21:00:06 -0500 (EST)
From: yiddish1@juno.com (Feigl I Glaser)
Subject: dray doyres fun i. opatowska

Oyb ikh gedenk rikhtik hot di shrayberke fun der untn-ongegebener
poemegeheysn i. opatovska un gevoynt in sovyetn farband.  Mir,
kinder in der
Yidisher shul, hobn gedarft di poeme zikh oyslernen fun oysnveynik.
Oyb
imetser ken mir oysbesern oder tsugebn vos ikh loz durkh oder gedenk
nisht
gut, bet ikh aykh mir dos tsushikn. 

Mayn bobe hot gevust -- dos tepl un dem sider,
Un nor a shmoln veg -- fun kikh in shil.
Di zibn teg in vokh hot zi zikh fest tseglidert --
Zeks oyf mi un zorg, shabes ru un shpil;
Tanaysim opgehit, vi got hot ir gebotn,
Nedoves mogere geteylt;
Di elterngefolgt, nor dos eygene harts tsetrotn
Un khasene gehat mit dem vos tate-mame hobn oysgeveylt.
Un az der tate hot dernokh geheysn mitn man zikh sheydn --
Der man, der apikoyres reykhert shabes a tsigar;
Iz ver vet geyn dertseyln im fun libe-leydn?
Shtiler harts, nit zay keyn nar!

Mayn mamen hobn shoyn di enge vent genumen drikn.
Tsu an ander lebn hot ir harts geglust;
Hot zi zikh gepruvt di enge vent tserukn
Un an otem ton mit fuler brust.
Vegn breytere hot zi far zikh gefunen -- 
Hot der ershter veg gefirt in shul;
Nisht ahin vu shtile tfiles rinen,
nor vu yunger seykhl vert geshtolt.
Hobn di vent zikh mitamol geton a vakl -- 
s'iz aropgefaln a heytl fun ir blik;
Shvartse oysyelekh oyf vays papir sakh-hakl,
Un es nert gedanken un es kvikt.
Un es geyen yorn, kinder vaksn unter
Un di mame rayst tsvishn shul un shtub;
S'iz der mamen tayer i shul, i shtub bazunder;
aynhitn zey beyde hot zi zikh gepruvt.

Der bobes eynikl, der mames tokhter -- ikh!
Langzam geyen teg, nor yorn flien gikh!
A ringele a drits in langer doyres-keyt
Un ale zaynen nor in eybikayt farzeyt.
Oysgeloshn zaynen itst di fayern fun kikh,
Gevorn zaynen ire vent tselekhert durkh un durkh.
Mit pen in hant, mit nodl oder tsvang
Mir mener glaykh, mir shteyen yorn-lang.
Un nit in shtilshtand nor --
Mit mener zeynen mir oyf shlakhtfelder geven
Fargesn hobn mir in ru fun shtile vent.
                
Ayer,
Feygl Infeld Glezer

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 16 Nov 1998 09:38:48 -0500 (EST)
From: Sapoznik@aol.com
Subject: Itzik Feffer recordings

I read with great hanoe the two poems by Itzik Feffer which reminded
me of
the time I began my tenure as the sound archivist in the YIVO. I was
consolidating the sound recordings located throughout the building
when I
came across a listing which read "Khasene in Biro-Bidjan" and
"Birobidjaner
Freylekhs".  Thinking they were music field recordings I anxiously
located
them and instead found they were Itzik Feffer himself reading his
poems
while in America in 1942 raising funds for the Anti-Fascist Committee.
Recorded for broadcast on WEVD by the late founder of Folkways
records Moe
Asch, they were thrilling and moving readings of this heroic and tragic
figure.  The recordings and their preserved copies should still be in the
YIVO sound archives. 

Heynekh Sapoznik

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 17 Nov 1998 04:37:08 -0500 (EST)
From: AJ Gilboa <bfgilboa@wis.weizmann.ac.il>
Subject: Galitzyaner cooking

All this talk about Galitzianer vs. Litvak cooking brings back memories
of
growing up in a "mixed marriage" home. My mother was of Litvak
origins, my
father - Galitzianer. Somehow, my mother developed a refined style of
cooking that toned down the intense sweetness of the G. as well as
the fiery
pepper of the L. So it was an eye-opener (in more than one sense)
when we
went to visit a maternal aunt in Bridgeport and I ate, for the first time,
real Litvak gefilte fish - pure pepper. We also were treated from time to
time with grated black radish and onions with shmaltz and pepper (just
a
touch). I think my father must have abstained on that one. Then I was
young
enough not to know what heartburn was. Last Shabbat, I was inspired
by
Mendele to prepare my own "refined" version of the heartburn special,
using
daikon instead of black radish, chives instead of onion, vegetable oil
instead of shmaltz and just a dash of salt and pepper. It tasted great
and I
was up half the night with heartburn! 

Yosef Gilboa

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 15 Nov 1998 15:16:15 -0500 (EST)
From: "Gilda and Bob Kurtzman" <kurtzman@ultinet.co.il>
Subject: Shreib in Yiddish!

On another occasion I shall add my voice to the on-going discussion
on
Yiddish--fact or fantasy? Today I want to advocate a few ground rules
for
participating in Mendele e-mail. No matter how bad your Yiddish is all
communications should be in mama loshen and for those whose
Yiddish
vocabulary is limited, write in English, for I have found most queries
and
remarks were significant. I will ask those who accept the "rule" to follow
the Yiddish with an English translation or summary With the exception
of the
Yiddish press most discussion about Yiddish the language the culture
the
music and the theater is in English, Hebrew, Spanish Dutch and other
tongues. I learned Hebrew and Yiddish best where the language of
instruction
was Hebrew or Yiddish and the teaching staff would only speaak to
you in
Hebrew or Yiddish. 

And to demonstrate my personal commitment to the above ground
rules
henceforth--alles in mama loschen. 

Dorneshtig und Freitig die voch iz rosh chodesh Kislev und bald,ot ot
vellen
mir firen der yom toff Chanukah. Ich demon zich in die berimte
Chanukah
liedel voss mein mitter (yaw, ich bin foon die Rissheshe chasidim voss
zogen
mitter, pitter brider anshtat mutter, putter, bruder ober mein tatte hat
mir
gelarynt az literaturische Yiddish iz Litvak Yiddish.)flegt zingen noch
dem
bentscen Chanukah licht und zingen Ha-nairos hallawlu und Mo-os
tzur. 

Ich gedenk nor etliche versen Ich bin zicher az dorten in Mendel-land iz
emitzer vawss vaist alle versen oder ken mir shreiben vee ich ken
bakommen
die verter foon die gantze liedel. 

Oy yeshaina lichtalach
Ihr dertzelt geshichtelach
Maisselach un tzall
Ihr dertzelt foon behrenschaft (?)
--------------vunder foon amawl
Az ich zey eich flinkendik (?)
Kommt awf mir a ?

Mehr gedenk ich nisht

Thursday and Friday this week mark the beginning of the month of
Kislev.
Soon we will be celebrating Chanuka. Can anyone out there in Mendel
Land
write me the missing words and verses to the popular Chanuka song
my mother
used to sing after lighting the Chanuha candles and singing Hanayros
hallawlu and Mawauss tzur? Above are the words I recall.

A fraylichen Chanuka tzu allemen (Happy Chanuka to one and all).

Yankel Kurtzman

[Moderator's note: It is preferable to use YIVO romanization rules
(http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/Translit/) for the Yiddish transliteration.
-i.v.]
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.087

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



