Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
____________________________________________________

Contents of Vol. 15.041
February 7, 2006

1) dreydl song origins (Lori Cahan-Simon)
2) farher (Leizer Gillig)
3) Saul Halpern and Birobidzhan (Nicole Taylor)
4) klal-shprakniks (Dan Goodridge)
5) khates (Arnold Abramovitz)
6) Jewish Snobbery in Literature (Lilian Falk)
7) Polish Anarchism (Martyn Everett)
8) Gezukht: Lider af yidish fun dorem-afrike (Shloyme-Khaim Cohen)
9) Yiddish Cultural Footage Requested (David Weintraub)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: December 19, 2005
Subject: dreydl song origins

I just got a new piece in the puzzle in my never-ending search for the 
true origins of the dreydl song.  To recap, for those who may have missed 
the "exciting" story thus far:

Most people are familiar with the English "I Have a Little Dreidel," 
attributed to Grossman (lyrics) and Goldfarb (music).  The earliest 
version I have found in print is from Coopersmith's 1950 volume, The Songs 
We Sing.  Anecdotally, the earliest any of my sources remember having 
heard the song was around 1945.  A descendant of Goldfarb said that 
Goldfarb wrote the song while a young man at the New York Jewish Bureau of 
Education (I may have the name of this institution incorrect and hope that 
someone can correct me, if so.  If anyone knows where to find out what 
years he may have worked there, that would be a great help).

One of Goldfarb's sons gave me a copy of the song in his own hand, 
unfortunately undated.  He told me his father did not publish it in The 
Jewish Songster because he felt this children's song was not of 
consequence.  The lyrics refer to a dreydl made of air-dried, unfired 
clay, which not only would not stand up to the rigors of play, and would 
probably not spin nicely if made by a child without the skills to create a 
symmetrically weighted product, but was also not traditionally a material 
used to make dreydls.  My impression is that the word clay in the English 
version was used merely as an appropriate rhyme based on an approximate 
translation of the Yiddish.

In my latest breakthrough, just yesterday I spoke with a woman in her 
early 90s who attended the New York Arbeter Ring shuln beginning in 1921. 
She remembers learning the song from Mikhl Gelbart himself, the author and 
composer of the Yiddish version, who had been the music teacher since the 
inception of the shuln in 1918.  The earliest dated print version I have 
found of "Ikh bin a kleyner dreydl" is from 1945, and the earliest date I 
had ascertained previously was from a former student who remembered 
learning it in the early 1930s, while attending with her older brother. 
People who may remember its earliest date are getting hard to find.

Another incident pointing to Gelbart as the original author and composer 
is that of a woman who worked in the NY Workmen's Circle offices who was 
told by another office worker, who was there in the 1950s, that Gelbart 
was angry at the time, and trying to figure out how to sue "the 
interloper" who stole his song, but as his small salary didn't afford him 
the means to afford a lawyer for the job.

A factor that weighs in heavily, for me, is that in the Yiddish lyrics, as 
opposed to having been made from clay, the dreydl is made of lead, which 
is the material traditionally used for making dreydls.  (From the evidence 
of another song, I believe the molten lead would have been poured into a 
four-piece wooden mold.)

Problematic is the fact that Gelbart had the practice of borrowing songs, 
from both Yiddish and other languages, and adapting them for his uses. 
However, he would sometimes indicate that certain songs were from an 
English song in his published work, without being specific as to the name 
of the original.  I assume he felt that the origins of those borrowed 
songs he published without attribution were obvious to those conversant 
with Yiddish culture.  An example of this is his A yingele, a meydele, 
which is the same as the older folksong Der rebele, der gabele, but for a 
few words.


Equally confounding is my finding that the Goldfarbs, in their book The 
Jewish Songster, attribute some songs to themselves or others that, I have 
been told, were not written by them or the composers indicated.=

For those not familiar with one or the other version of this song, the 
melodies are identical and the lyrics almost identical:


Yiddish:
I am a little dreydl
I am made out of lead
Everyone come play
Dreydl, one, two, three.
    Oh, dreydl, dreydl, dreydl
    Oh, spin around, dreydl, spin
    So, everyone come play
    Dreydl, one and two.


English:
I have a little dreidel
I made it out of clay
And when it's dry and ready
Oh, dreidel I shall play
    Oh, dreidel, dreidel, dreidel,
    I made it out of clay
    And when it's dry and ready
    Oh, dreidel I shall play.

Of course, in Yiddish it rhymes nicely.  There are further verses with 
correspondences.

So, I still don't have a confirmed conclusion, even though the evidence, 
to me, points to a Yiddish origin for the song.  Why either of these men 
would plagiarize the other is beyond me, but to think that this was a 
coincidental accident, with an identical melody and similar lyrics, is 
unlikely.

I hope that anyone with further clues or information for me will contact 
me.

Mit frayndshaft,
Leyele/Lori Cahan-Simon,


2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: December 19
Subject: farher

A "farher" - fey, alef, RAYSH, hey, raysh - is an oral examination, 
usually of a boy's Torah learning. Farhern is also a verb, as in Der tate 
hot farhert zayn zun. When many people pronounce the word, the first raysh 
gets lost, so it does indeed sound like "faher."

Leizer Gillig


3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: December 19
Subject: Saul Halpern and Birobidzhan

I am a London-based film-maker and Yiddishist, working on an adaptation of 
the memoirs of a woman connected with American Jewish Communists in Los 
Angeles during the thirties.  I have come across some letters from a Los 
Angeles journalist called Saul Halpern, with whom I'd very much like to be 
in touch, but so far, Google searching and calling information hasn't 
yielded any contact details.  I would be very grateful to anyone who could 
put me in touch with Mr. Halpern.

More generally, I am very keen to be in touch with anyone with a personal 
connection to Birobidzhan; ICOR; migrs to the region etc.

Many thanks in advance.

Nicole Taylor

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: December 19
Subject: Klal-shprakniks

Having read and thoroughly enjoyed Michael Wex's "Born to kvetch," I must 
reject his characterization of klal-shprakhniks as "humorless strident 
nudniks" (Allan Nadler).  I learnt my yidish at the ripe old age of 72 in 
a university setting from a lecturer who also acquired yidish at a 
university. Hence I could be described as a second generation 
klal-shprakhnik,(or as close as one get there starting from a Russian 
mameloshn) but, although I  regret that klal yidish was not more generally 
accepted, I have no quarrel with those who say "vaab" instead of "vayb," 
as long as the orthography is standardized.  The clever Chinese have 
solved that problem years ago - a multitude of diverse dialects which are 
incomprehensible to people outside
their domains, but (on the mainland) a single set of characters, so that 
the written language is standardized.  Yiddish has followed suit (more or 
less) with the takones fun der klal yidisher shprakh (YIVO).  So all is 
well, and long may it prosper.

Dan Goodridge


5)----------------------------------------------------
Date:  December 21
Subject: khates

My tentative little article got well and truly mangled in vol.15 no.37 of 
Mendele.

In case you'd like to reprint it, here it is as I originally sent it:

There are many terms of opprobrium for gentiles: goy, yok, sheygetz, poyer 
are some which I believe are known internationally.  There is one, 
however, that seems to be peculiar to South African Yiddish.  Or, to put 
it more carefully, I have not yet heard of its being used by non-South 
African Yiddish speakers.  The word is khattess.  In this country it is 
used as a pejorative term applied to a working class Afrikaner.  The 
nearest Hebrew is khattat, which I think was a biblical term used to 
describe the sin to be "transferred" to a scapegoat, after which the beast 
would somehow "contain" sin loaded into it by human sinners, and hence 
would itself be (in a sense) an innocent or unknowing or ignorant sinner.

Arnold Abramovitz


6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: December 21
Subject: Jewish Snobbery in Literature

A delightful satire on Jewish snobbery was written by Israel Zangwill and 
published in the IDLER in 1893 and re-published many times since.  It is a 
short book of six chapters titled "The King of Schnorrers".
Originally written in English, it was also translated into Yiddish.  There 
have been several adaptations for the stage.  It is set in London in late 
eighteenth century and concerns a brazen Sephardi Schnorrer
named DaCosta who repeatedly takes advantage of the snobbishness of a rich 
Ashkenazi Jew named Grobstock.  The original version was richly 
illustrated by the artist George Hutchinson.

Lilian Falk

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: January 6, 2006
Subject: Polish Anarchism

I have a long-standing interest in the history of
Polish anarchism, and I have a copy of pamphlet about
the Polish anarchist movement in World War II which is
in Yiddish.  I am trying to find someone who speaks
Yiddish who might have the time to translate the
pamphlet into English.

Martyn Everett

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: January 6
Subject: Gezukht: Lider af yidish fun dorem-afrike

Mayn khor, Sharim v'Sharot, zukht lider af yidish fun dorem-afrike,
spetsyel aranzhirt far khor (SATB), ober di melodye un tekst voltn geven
genug oykh. Ken emetser mir zogn oyb s'gefinen zikh azelkhe lider, un vu?

My choir, Sharim v'Sharot, seeks songs in Yiddish from South Africa,
especially those arranged for choir (SATB), but the melody and text would 
also be enough. Is there someone who can tell me if such songs exist, and 
where?

A dank/Thanks,

Shloyme-Khayim (Steve) Cohen

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date:  January 6
Subject: Yiddish cultural footage requested

The Dora Teitelboim Center for Yiddish Culture is in the process of 
completing a documentary film on Yiddish culture in America, specifically 
focusing on the Yiddish legacy in Miami Beach, what happened to it, and 
efforts to preserve and promote the continuity of Yiddish culture in 
America.

The Center is currently seeking contemporary as well as older footage of 
children singing Yiddish songs, participating in holiday events, reading 
poetry, etc. as well as contemporary and archival musical performance by 
adults and children, footage of Yiddish education, etc.  (None of this 
needs to have occurred in Miami.)

If you have access to any of this or have information about who to 
contact, please contact David Weintraub at info@yiddishculture.org or call 
him at (305) 774-9244.  Thank you.



----------------------------------------------------
End of Mendele Vol. 15.041


Please do not use the "reply" key when writing to Mendele. Instead, choose
one of these two:


Messages for posting on Mendele
Personal and other messages to the shamosim