
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 12.015
February 19, 2002

1) CFP: Teaching/Reading Yiddish Literature, MLA 03 (Dror Abend-David)
2) position: Managing Editor of the YIVO Encyclopedia (Peggy Hermann)
3) Vilnius program in Yiddish (Laima Gumuliauskaite)
4) yivo yiddish summer program (Yankl Salant)
5) new book on Bashevis (Hugh Denman)
6) New Book: Scorned my Nation (Dror Abend-David)
7) On Yiddish Women Literature in Granada (Alicia Ramos Gonzalez)
8) More on Lebensbild/lebnsbild (Nina Warnke)
9) Di yiddishe sho (Nachum Wilchesky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 31 Dec 2002 12:58:48 -0500 (EST)
From: "Dror Abend-David" <d.abend.1@alumni.nyu.edu>
Subject: CFP: Teaching/Reading Yiddish Literature, MLA 03

The topic for the 2003 session arranged by the American Association of
Professors of Yiddish at the Modern Language Association Annual Meeting
in San Diego will be "Teaching/Reading Yiddish Literature."
 
Yiddish literature is rarely mentioned without superlatives such as
"rich," "vibrant," "unique," or even "ground-breaking."  In fact, it is
sometimes referred to as the building-block of modern Yiddish culture
in its entirety.  But though we hear of a Renaissance in Jewish studies
in general, and in Yiddish studies in particular, is Yiddish literature
taking its place alongside new courses in Yiddish language and
linguistics, history, culture and anthropology?  Is Yiddish literature
taught on a comparable level to other national literatures?  Proposals
for this session might address (but are not limited to) the following
topics: literary texts as a part of language instruction; teaching
Yiddish literature in translation/original; teaching Yiddish literature
at intensive summer programs (Columbia/Oxford/Vilna); teaching medieval
Yiddish literature; the application of contemporary literary theory to
Yiddish literature; comparative literature and Yiddish;  graduate
research in Yiddish literature; syllabi and curricula in Yiddish
literature.
 
Abstracts, no longer than 500 words, should be submitted by March 1,
2003.  Electronic submissions are preferred.  Abstracts can be sent via
e-mail under the subject heading of "TYL Abstract" to Dror Abend-David,
at d.abend.1@alumni.nyu.edu Proposals can also be sent by mail to:
 
Dr. Dror Abend-David
658 Carroll St. #3-A
Brooklyn, NY 11215-2037
 
Dror Abend-David

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 9 Jan 2003 09:08:19 -0500
From: Peggy Hermann <phermann@yivo.cjh.org>
Subject: position: Managing Editor of the YIVO Encyclopedia

The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research seeks F/T Managing Editor for
Jews in Eastern Europe: The YIVO Encyclopedia.  Working in Manhattan at
the Center for Jewish History, the ME will be charged with the
day-to-day management and oversight of all aspects of the
encyclopedia's preparation and production.  He/She will report to the
Editor in Chief and will work closely with the supervising editors and
publisher.  ME's duties include: hiring and supervising support staff;
managing project budget; preparing and administering editor and
contributor contracts; supervising extensive Access database; tracking
submissions from invitation to publication; supervising the acquisition
and preparation of all graphic materials; overseeing the development of
online version of publication; organizing editorial and other meetings
as necessary; some grant writing; supervising the preparation of the
final manuscript, and coordinating publication process for print and
online version with publisher.  Publication scheduled for 2008.

The ideal candidate will have excellent interpersonal, intellectual,
administrative, editorial, and IT skills and experience.  He/She must
have a working knowledge of database management and word-processing
expertise. Experience in reference or academic publishing and/or
graduate work in a related field highly desirable.  Knowledge of east
European and/or Jewish languages a plus.  Salary commensurate with
experience.  Excellent benefits.

Send cover letter and resume including list of three references by
January 30, 2003 to:

gershon.hundert@mcgill.ca

Or

Professor Gershon Hundert
Department of Jewish Studies
3438 McTavish Street
Montreal, QC H3A 1X9
CANADA
Fax:  514-398-5158

Peggy Hermann 

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 29 Jan 2003 16:47:23 +0100
From: Vilnius Program in Yiddish <info@yiddishvilnius.com>
Subject: The VILNIUS PROGRAM IN YIDDISH ** July 28 - August 26, 2003

Dear Friend,

The Vilnius Yiddish Institute is pleased to bring to your attention the
Sixth Annual Vilnius Program in Yiddish Language and Culture, which
will be held at Vilnius University in Vilnius, Lithuania, July 28 É^A^O
August 26, 2003. My colleagues and I would be most happy to welcome you
in Vilna.

The uniqueness of the program derives from its location in Vilnius, for
hundreds of years Vilna (Yiddish VA-lne), a key European center of
Ashkenazic Jewish creativity. The city is now a thriving capital in a
modern democracy with all western amenities and offers a wide range of
options for residence, dining and leisure to suit every taste and
budget.

The Vilnius program features accredited university courses, ranging
from beginning to advanced. These comprise the programÉ^A^Us ACADEMIC
COMPONENT (five mornings a week). Participants must enroll in the
entire four-week course which leads to university credit and a
certificate of completion.

The programÉ^A^Us CULTURAL COMPONENT (afternoons, evenings and
weekends), offers an array of activities from which participants may
choose at will, based on interest and appeal. It has been specially
designed by the Vilnius Yiddish Institute to enable participants to
reconnect to authentic Yiddish culture, to the history of its
development and its unique living civilization. The Cultural Component
can be taken on its own for any length of time within the dates of the
program.

In the mornings you will study Yiddish intensively with two
instructors, each of whom is a specialist in meeting the needs of your
particular level. The classes are energetically paced. Nevertheless,
individual attention is given to each student, and a tutor is on hand
to help privately in the afternoons whenever needed.

This year the faculty will comprise such leading and experience d 
Yiddish language instructors as

   Professor Jerold C. FRAKES, Professor of German and Comparative
    Literature, University of Southern California, Los Angeles (USA)
   Ms. Miriam HOFFMAN, lecturer of Yiddish language, Columbia
    University, New York (USA)
   Professor Avrohom LICHTENBOYM, Director of YIVO, Buenos Aires 
    (Argentina)
   Dr. Robert M. SHAPIRO, Ramaz School and the Judaic Studies
    Department at Brooklyn College, New York (USA)
   Assoc. Professor Anna VERSCHIK, Chair of General and Applied
    Linguistics, Tallinn Pedagogical University, Tallinn  (Estonia)

   Completed application form, you can submit at our website
    www.yiddishvilnius.com or send via e-mail to 
    info@yiddishvilnius.com
    or fax to + 370-5 2687 186

Please contact our office for further particulars of payment options.

Please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions you might have
relating to the program (or to the first-rate modern amenities
available in todayÉ^A^Us Vilnius), and I will get back to you quickly.
You can reach me, as well as address your applications and seek for
further information at the address, telephone and fax below, by e-mail
at info@yiddishvilnius.com , and via our website:
www.yiddishvilnius.com .

VILNIUS SUMMER PROGRAM IN YIDDISH
Vilnius Yiddish Institute
Vilnius University
Universiteto 7, Vilnius 2734
Lithuania
Telephone: + 370-5 2687 187
Fax: + 370-5 2687 186

My colleagues and I hope to have the pleasure of welcoming you to
Vilnius for the Summer Program 2003.

Yours sincerely,

Laima Gumuliauskaite
Summer Program Coordinator

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 4 Feb 2003 15:55:38 -0500 (EST)
From: Yankl Salant <ysalant@yivo.cjh.org>
Subject: yivo yiddish summer program

THE YIDDISH SUMMER PROGRAM -- JUNE 23-AUGUST 1, 2003

The Uriel Weinreich Program, located on Columbia University's
Morningside Heights campus, offers peerless instruction in Yiddish
language, and an in-depth exploration of the literature and culture of
East European/American Jewry. The core of the program is an intensive
3-credit language course (9am-12:30pm, Monday through Friday) at one of
four levels, designed to develop proficiency in speaking, reading and
writing, as well as cultural literacy, in a concentrated period of
time. As an essential complement to the morning course, students are
required to attend Yiddish conversation classes and can choose from
among several workshops and lecture series (1:30-6pm, Monday through
Thursday). In addition, there are related excursions and social events
on some evenings and Sundays. The intensive nature of the program
precludes employment or enrollment in other courses, and allows only
limited time for tourism.

Because the program is offered in conjunction with the Max Weinreich
Center for Advanced Jewish Studies of the YIVO Institute for Jewish
Research, students have the opportunity to visit YIVO at its new home
in the Center for Jewish History, and to become acquainted with YIVO's
Library and Archives, one of the world's major collections of materials
for the study of East European and American Yiddish culture.

ELEMENTARY YIDDISH
Yiddish S1111R*
Instructors: Staff
3 points.  Daily, 9am-12:30pm

An introduction to modern Standard Yiddish with equal attention to
speaking, reading and writing. A thorough study of the grammar covered
in chapters 1-20 of College Yiddish.

INTERMEDIATE YIDDISH I
Yiddish S1131R*   
Instructors: Staff
3 points.  Daily, 9am-12:30pm

Prerequisite: knowledge of chapters 1-20 of College Yiddish. A
continuation of the study of grammar in College Yiddish and other
grammar sources. Readings in Yiddish texts about the life and culture
of East European/American Jewry. Continued emphasis on composition,
conversation and idiomatic expression. Conducted in Yiddish. Permission
of director. Refresher course may be required.

INTERMEDIATE YIDDISH II
Yiddish S1132R*   
Instructors: Staff
3 points.  Daily, 9am-12:30pm

A continuation of the study of grammar at a more advanced level.
Readings in Yiddish texts about the life and culture of East
European/American Jewry. Introductory survey of modern Yiddish
literature. Continued emphasis on composition, conversation and
idiomatic expression. Conducted in Yiddish. Permission of director.
Refresher course may be required.

ADVANCED YIDDISH
Yiddish S3201R*
Instructors: Staff
3 points.  Daily, 9am-12:30pm

A study of more advanced grammatical issues.  A comprehensive survey of
modern Yiddish literature covering major works of fiction and poetry.
Continued emphasis on composition, conversation and idiomatic
expression. Conducted in Yiddish. Permission of director. Refresher
course may be required.

*Instructors will review placement level at the beginning of the
program.

CONVERSATION
Students participate twice weekly in required conversation classes,
where they have an opportunity to experience the living culture and
polish their verbal skills through exercises and discussions.

WORKSHOPS
Students choose from several workshops including translation, drama,
folksong and traditional dance which offer direct contact with these
vibrant facets of the Yiddish cultural legacy. NEW! The Yiddish
teacher-training workshop returns this year for those who wish to
improve their Yiddish language-teaching skills.

LECTURE SERIES
A lecture series, conducted in both English and Yiddish, opens new
windows on the history of Yiddish language, literature and East
European/American Jewish culture. Our speakers include prominent
researchers as well as distinguished proponents of Yiddish culture in
the United States and abroad, such as poets, artists and journalists.

REFRESHER COURSE
Tuesday, June 10 through Friday, June 20
Students applying for the intermediate or advanced courses are strongly
urged to attend the 2-week refresher course, 2.5 hours daily,
9:30am-12:00pm. The rest of the day is unprogrammed. May be required
for some students. Fee: $200

READING SKILLS WORKSHOP
Sunday, June 22
Required of elementary students who have no prior reading or writing
knowledge of the Yiddish alphabet. No fee.

HOUSING
Students may choose to live in Yidish-Hoyz, a dormitory-style
arrangement with single rooms on the Columbia campus. 'Hoyzniks' have
the opportunity to bring their Yiddish out of the classroom and into
their daily lives. Cost is not included in tuition fee. A deposit
payment will be required to guarantee a room. Limited space available.
Call now to reserve.

TUITION AND FEES ($US)
Payable to Columbia University:
Application fee (non-refundable) $35
Tuition* (Columbia students) $2634
Tuition* (visiting students) $2412
Facilities fee $27
Transcript fee (one-time only) $45

Payable to YIVO Institute:
Student fee $85
Xerox and Materials $20
Refresher course (optional) $200

*Partial tuition assistance is available from YIVO. Contact YIVO for a
scholarship application form. Scholarship applicants must make sure
YIVO receives ALL application materials including scholarship materials
by March 21, 2003. Scholarship applicants will be notified by April 25,
2003.

Apply now! Space is limited. 

Program and fees subject to change without notice.

For More Details...
Yankl Salant
YIVO Institute for Jewish Research 
15 West 16th Street
New York, NY 10011-6301, USA
Phone: (212) 294-6138
Fax: (212) 292-1892
E-mail: ysalant@yivo.cjh.org

Yankl Salant

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 22 Dec 2002 15:38:22 -0500 (EST)
From: Hugh Denman <h.denman@ucl.ac.uk>
Subject: new book on Bashevis

Mendelyaner may be interested to hear that my new book on Bashevis is
about to appear:

Denman, Hugh, ed., _Isaac Bashevis Singer: His Work and His World_ [IJS
Studies in Judaica 1], Leiden: Brill, 2002, 318pp. [IBSN:
90-04-12564-7], E 99.00 (h.b.).

The work includes valuable contributions by Anita Norich, Leonard
Prager, Joseph Sherman, Chone Shmeruk (z"l), Chava Turniansky, Seth
Wolitz and other prominent scholars. Among the topics covered are the
relationship of the Yiddish and English texts, Bashevis and Poland, the
sources of his themes as well as his motifs and narrative techniques.

May I take this opportunity of thanking the increasing number of
Mendelyaner who have recently taken the trouble to give accurate
bibliographic details of new publications of Yiddish interest. This is
of invaluable assistance to Mendelyaner in general, to those of us who
have to place orders for major libraries and especially to me in my
task as bibliographer to _The Mendele Review_. Very shortly I mean to
resume the contribution to _TMR_ of annual bibliographies (picking up
where I previously left off) of books in Yiddish, on Yiddish and
translated into or out of Yiddish. These bibliographies are intended to
help people keep abreast of the welter of relevant publications
appearing across the world. In this endeavour the more help I get from
Mendelyaner the better service I shall be able to deliver, so do keep
on posting details of new books either to Mendele itself or direct to
me!

Hugh Denman, 
London
        
6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 28 Jan 2003 09:36:11 -0500 (EST)
From: "Dror Abend-David" <d.abend.1@alumni.nyu.edu>
Subject: New Book: Scorned my Nation

Dear Friends,
 
I am pleased to let you know of the publication of my first book,
'Scorned my Nation:' A Comparison of Translations of The Merchant of
Venice into German, Hebrew, and Yiddish.  Following is some
information:

Dror Abend-David, 'Scorned my Nation:' A Comparison of Translations of
The Merchant of Venice into German, Hebrew, and Yiddish. New York:
Peter Lang, 2003.  247 pages.  $65.95. ISBN: 0820457981 (Koret Jewish
Publications Program Award, 2001).
 
In this book, the German history of The Merchant of Venice highlights
the Central European detour that Shakespearean reception underwent in
Hebrew and Yiddish. Such a detour, with its various discomforts, is
used to penetrate a current historical and political historiography,
rendering Shylock a character that remembers various languages and
locations, as well as multiple alternatives for political
self-definition. This complex Shakespearean character speaks in many
voices and for various purposes and is the only character that can
provide the missing link between two contradictory Jewish stereotypes-a
persecuted and victimized underling and a merciless and violent
plaintive, holding out his knife to draw blood.
 
Dror Abend-David

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 6 Jan 2003 06:59:30 -0500 (EST)
From:  Alicia Ramos Gonzalez <aramos@ugr.es>
Subject: On Yiddish Women Literature in Granada 

Dear colleagues,

Just a few words to inform you that the University of Granada (Spain)
is supporting (from December 2002 to January 2005 on a first stage) a
research project on Yiddish Women Literature, specially focused on
Esther Kreytman.

This research project will be developed by Dr. Alicia Ramos Gonzalez at
the Instituto de Estudios de la Mujer (Women's Studies Institute) of
the University of Granada.

Please, don't hesitate to contact me (aramos@ugr.es) for additional
information. My postal address is the following:

Dra. Alicia Ramos Gonzalez
Instituto de Estudios de la Mujer
Edificio de Documentacion Cientifica
c/ Rector Lopez Argueta, s/n
Universidad de Granada
18071, Granada (SPAIN)

Sincerely,

Alicia Ramos Gonzalez

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 14 Jan 2003 10:56:12 -0500 (EST)
From: Nina  Warnke <warnke@mail.utexas.edu>
Subject: More on Lebensbild/lebnsbild

In Vol. 7 No. 11, Brigitte Dalinger responded to Leonard Prager's
questions about Lebensbild/lebnsbild suggesting that the term stems
from 19th century German theater and is connected with the Viennese
actor and folksinger Albert Hirsch. She is certainly right that the
genre was popular in Vienna. Here is some more information which might
help to clarify the origins of the Lebensbild.

In his study Theatre in Vienna: A Critical History, 1776-1995
(Cambridge, 1996) W. E. Yates mentions the origin of the term and
genre. It seems to have been coined or at least popularized by the
Viennese playwright Friedrich Kaiser who wrote his first Lebensbild,
Wer wird Amtmann?, in 1840 as a programmatic response to Nestroy's
satirical plays. I have been corresponding with Professor Yates in the
past few weeks and asked him for some further elucidation. I quote here
from his responses with his permission:

"The term was not in use -- certainly not regularly so -- as a
designation for a dramatic sub-genre before Friedrich Kaiser. The
passage in _Theatre in Vienna_, pp.118-120, gives the context for the
term: under the leadership of the astute theatre director Carl Carl,
the commercial theatre in Vienna had become dominated by Nestroy, who
both as satiric playwright and as actor was a comic genius. Kaiser,
though a minor talent, was the most prominent of those who wanted the
commercial stage to show more non-satirical, edifying, rather
sentimental plays. The terms 'Lebensbild' and 'Charakterbild' (which so
far as I can see Kaiser used interchangeably) are programmatic: they
are directed against a satirical stylisation of dialect drama, they
purport to show 'real' life and 'real' characters....

In his memoir 'Unter fÅnfzehn Theater-Direktoren. Bunte Bilder aus der
Wiener BÅhnenwelt' (Vienna: Waldheim, 1870, pp. 125-26) Kaiser wrote:
"Ich hatte einem neuen Genre, dem des von mir also getauften 'Lebens-
oder  Charakterbildes', in welchem der Ernst immer gleichen Schritt mit
dem Scherze hielt, Bahn gebrochen [...]; ja ich gab mich der Hoffnung
hin, da· das _VolksstÅck_, wie _ich_ es mir dachte, nÑmlich als ein
treues Bild des Lebens, welches, wie Jean Paul sagt, an einem Fu·e den
Kothurn, am andern den Soccus trÑgt, seine Bedeutsamkeit_fÅr_ und
seinen Einflu· _auf_ das Volk wieder gewinnen werde." [I pioneered a
new genre which I named 'Lebensbild' or 'Charakterbild' and in which
seriousness and humor always keep pace with each other ... Yes, I was
hoping that the "VolksstÅck" as I envisioned it--as a true picture of
life which, in Jean Paul's words, wears the 'Kothurn' [the high shoe
worn by Greek tragedians] on one foot and the 'Soccus' [the low shoe
worn by Greek comedians] on the other--will regain its significance
_for_ and its influence _on_ the people." (English translation by
N.W.)] That sums up the mix of realism and sentimentality plus the
edifying aim characteristically claimed by Kaiser (though I think that
should be taken with a pinch of salt as there is a strong political
subtext there). The term 'Lebensbild' was taken over by other minor
dramatists in Vienna (Anton Langer, Carl Elmar, even O. F. Berg) into
the 1850s and 1860s, and Kaiser himself went on using it until his
death in 1874. But it was not, I note, adopted by Anzengruber, who uses
the term 'VolksstÅck'."

Thus the term and genre "Lebensbild" was not only used by
Jewish/Yiddish playwrights nor did it refer exclusively to a Jewish
milieu play. I presume that Yiddish playwrights came across this
sub-genre when they looked at the popular German-language repertoire
for plays they could adapt. This combination of tragic, comic, and
sentimental elements with a mix of realism that made up the Viennese
"Lebensbild", clearly appealed to many Yiddish playwrights--that may be
the reason why it became such an important genre. It started its career
early: Shomer wrote "lebnsbilder" from the very beginning, so did
Lateiner. Their "lebnsbilder" might be considered "sentimental realism"
heavily indebted to the conventions of melodrama. In fact, Shomer who
was certainly disdained for the contrivances of his stories, advocated
certain realistic elements in drama and on the stage. What separated
his demand for a realistic representation from that of the radical
intellectuals (Gordin, Cahan, et al) was that he seemed to take the
dramatic rules of melodrama as a given while the critics and
playwrights championing realist drama targeted exactly these
conventions (although they didn't always succeed in overcoming them).
It is noteworthy that writers like Gordin and the other so-called
realists among the radicals in New York tended to avoid the term,
preferring to call their plays "drama"--a term that implied literary
quality and "true" realism. It would certainly be worthwhile to study
the "lebnsbild" as a genre, analyze its conventions, and when it came
out of fashion.

Nina  Warnke 

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 19 Dec 2002 18:55:19 -0500 (EST)
From: "Nachum Wilchesky" <nachum22@hotmail.com>
Subject: Di yiddishe sho

And so it goes. Yet another milestone. 40 years ago, rather
accidentally , and somewhat unsure of myself, onSunday, December 23rd
1962 at 12 noon I sat in a radio studio and in a most mellifluous voice
proclaimed "Di yiddishe shoh, Hashaah hayehudit, the Jewish hour", a
one hour Radio Program on CFMB 1410AM in Yiddish, Hebrew and English.

Much has changed in 40 years. For one thing I very soon had to change
the name from a "shoh" to a "program", in Yiddish, becaause people who
wanted me to use pure Yiddish on my program when Yiddish was spoken
objected to my calling it "di Yiddishe Show"! And forty years later the
mellifluousness of the voice is also not what iy used to be.. Still on
this Sunday, the 22nd of December we complete forty years of
Broadcasting Jewish programming , and not only in Montreal , but
everywhere where Jews are in the world, through the Internet on
WWW.CFMB.CA.

Regards,

Nachum Wilchesky
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 12.015

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://www.mendele.net
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html


