
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 10.043
January 18, 2001

1) Yiddish Summer University: "Yiddish in Alsace" (Rafael Goldwaser)
2) forsh-seminar vegn yidisher kultur (Avrom Novershtern et al.)
3) Vilnius Program in Yiddish (Egdunas Racius)
4) Women's Yiddish Voices Conference (Susan Lerner)
5) Der Yidisher Tamtam numer 26 (Gilles Rozier)
6) Nayster numer Afn Shvel (Sholem Berger)
7) ershter numer Toplpunkt (Iosif Vaisman)
8) jiddische Lieder (Achim Freudenstein)
9) Dissertation on Yiddish Holocaust lullabies (Leonard Duhl)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 18 Dec 2000 10:10:48 -0500 (EST)
From: "GOLDWASER Rafael" <rafael.goldwaser@worldonline.fr>
Subject: Yiddish Summer University: "Yiddish in Alsace"

2äme UniversitÇ d'êtÇ : "Yiddish en Alsace" du 16 au 27 juillet 2001

 Ö l'ORT- Strasbourg

    - cours de yiddish en 3 niveaux :
 - niveau 1 : Sonia Pinkusowitz (Institut Martin Buber-Bruxelles)
 - niveau 2 : Miriam Trinh (UniversitÇ de JÇrusalem)
 - niveau 3 :  (en cours)

    -ateliers :
 - thÇÉtre avec Rafaâl Goldwaser
 - chanson et danse klezmer avec Astrid Ruff
 - cuisine

    - animations culturelles :
 - confÇrences et visio-confÇrences
 - dÇcouverte du patrimoine juif rural

 Inscription : plein tarif : 2.000.-F
  Çtudiant : 1.500.-F
  possibilitÇ d'hÇbergement en rÇsidence Çtudiante : 3.600.-F
  rens. : 00333 88 44 18 14 ou 00333 88 98 39 46
  e-mail : kruff@cybercable.fr
  site internet : http://lufteater.free.fr
  Der LufTeater - Le ThÇÉtre en l'Air

 2nd Yiddish Summer University  : "Yiddish in Alsace" 16th - 27th July 2001
 at the ORT School in Strasburg

    - Yiddish language course in 3 levels :
 - level 1 : Sonia Pinkusowitz (Martin Buber Institute - Brussels)
 - level 2 : Miriam Trinh (Jerusalem University)
 - level 3 :  (not decided yet)

    - Workshops :
 - Yiddish Theatre with Rafaâl Goldwaser
 - Klezmer Song & Dance with Astrid Ruff
 - Yiddish Cuisine

  - Cultural events :
 - Conferences and Video-conferences
 - Discovery of local rural Jewish heritage

 Registration fee : 2.000 French Francs
 student tarif : 1.500 French Francs
 Lodgings available in a student residence : 3.600 Fr Fr

 Information : 00333 88 44 18 14 or 00333 88 98 39 46
 e-mail : kruff@cybercable.fr
 web site  : http://lufteater.free.fr

Rafael Goldwaser

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 16 Jan 2001 18:38:40 -0500 (EST)
From: Rebecca Margolis <rm318@columbia.edu>
Subject: tsveyter internatsionaler forsh-seminar vegn yidisher kultur  

tsveyter internatsionaler forsh-seminar vegn yidisher kultur

Es freyt undz tzu anonsirn az der TSVEYTER INTERNATSIONALER FORSH-SEMINAR
VEGN YIDISHER KULTUR vet forkumen in Nyu York, in campus fun yidishn
teologishn seminar (JTS), tsvishn dem 18tn un dem 29stn yuni 2,001. Der
seminar  vert organizirt fun Beyt Sholem Aleykhem (Tel Aviv), dem
yidish-opteyl in hebreyshn universitet in Yerusholaym, der yidisher
teologisher seminar un der Yivo. Di onfirers veln zayn Avrom Novershtern
un  Dovid Roskies. Rivke Margolis vet zayn di administrative sekretarshe.

Der seminar vert planirt far graduir-studentn afn gebit fun yidish un
mizrekh eyropeisher yidisher kultur un geshikhte, zey zoln fartifern un
sistematizirn zeyer visn. Studentn fun farsheydene lender un
forsh-perspektivn veln zikh bakenen eyner mitn andern un oykh hobn a
gelegnhayt zikh tsu banitsn mit di raykhe forsh-resursn vos gefinen zikh
in Nyu York.

Di hatslokhe fun dem ershtn seminar vos iz forgekumen in Yisroel in 1999,
der entuzyazm fun zayne bateylikte, vi oykh zeyere forleygn vos shaykh a
hemshekh far undzer initsyativ, hobn undz gedint vi a yesod tsutsugreytn
dem hayyorikn seminar. Oykh dos mol iz di program oysn graduir- un
post-graduir-studentn vos viln zikh bateylikn in INTENSIVE LIMUDIM GEFIRT
IN GANTSN AF YIDISH.  Der kern fun seminar veln zayn di vayterdike temes
un lektorn:
- Yitskhok Niborski, "Der veg fun der yidisher shprakh-forshung un ire
hoyptgeshtaltn";
- Dovid Roskies, "Der  yidisher impresyonizm";
- Eugene Orenstein,"Ideologyes fun yidish";
- Ruth Wisse, "Avrom Sutzkevers shafn";
- Avrom Novershtern, "Di yidishe apokaliptishe poeme";
- Shikl Fishman, "Temes in yidisher sotsyo-lingvistik";
- Mordkhe Schaechter, "Klal-shprakh un shprakh-normirung".

Oyser dem veln studentn forshteln zeyer forsharbet, un me vet oykh hobn a
meglekhkeyt zikh tsu trefn  mit yidishe shraybers un kultur-tuers.

Dos mol vet der seminar take kenen onnemen nor biz akhtsn bateylikte. Di
vos veln es darfn veln krign stipendyes tsu dekn a mamoshesdikn teyl fun
zeyere for-hoytsoes, vi oykh a voynungort afn kheshbm fun di organizirers.

Keyn formeler aplikatsye-boygn iz nishto. Di farinteresirte darfn
araynshikn a blitsbriv mit a kurtser biografye un a bashraybung fun zeyer
forsharbet un interesn. 
Dem blitsbriv darfn zey shikn tsu di organizatorn fun dem seminar:
- nowers@shum.cc.huji.ac.il
- daroskies@jtsa.edu
Di farinteresirte darfn oykh araynshikn a transcript fun zeyer limudim afn
adres: 
Ms. Rebecca Margolis
Box 100
Jewish Theological Seminary
3080 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-4649
USA
Der letster termin arayntsugebn bakoshes iz dem 15tn februar. Di entfers
veln aroysgeshikt vern biz dem 31stn marts.

Di organizirers hobn fartrakht dem seminar vi an oyfn tsu helfn
tsutsugreytn dem nayem kader fun yidish-lerers un yidish forshers iber der
velt. Mir hofn zikh tsu trefn in Nyu York in yuni - in a guter sho!

Avrom Novershtern (nowers@shum.cc.huji.ac.il)
Dovid Roskies (daroskies@jtsa.edu)
Rivke Margolis (rm318@columbia.edu)

English abstract:

THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL ADVANCED SEMINAR IN YIDDISH STUDIES will be
taking place in New York from June 18 through June 29, 2001, on the campus
of the Jewish Theological Seminary.  The Seminar is co-sponsored by Beit
Sholem Aleichem in Tel Aviv, the Yiddish Department of the Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, the Jewish Theological Seminary, and the YIVO
Institute.  The organizers will be Avrom Nowersztern and David Roskies,
and the administrator will be Rebecca Margolis.

The Seminar is intended for graduate and post-graduate students in the
fields of Yiddish and Eastern European Jewish culture and history.  It is
to consist of intensive and advanced study of Yiddish literature, culture,
and language, and is to take place entirely in Yiddish.  

Interested applicants should submit an letter, in Yiddish, containing a
brief biography and description of their research and interests.
This should be sent via e-mail to:
- nowers@shum.cc.huji.ac.il
- daroskies@jtsa.edu
In addition, applicants are requested to send a university transcript to
the following address:
Ms. Rebecca Margolis
Box 100
Jewish Theological Seminary
3080 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-4649
USA
Deadline for applications is February 15, 2001.  Applicants will be
informed of their acceptance by March 31, 2001.  

Avrom Novershtern (nowers@shum.cc.huji.ac.il)
Dovid Roskies (daroskies@jtsa.edu)
Rivke Margolis (rm318@columbia.edu)

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 17 Jan 2001 16:02:50 -0500 (EST)
From: Egdunas Racius <info@yiddishvilnius.com>
Subject: Vilnius Program in Yiddish 

FOURTH ANNUAL VILNIUS PROGRAM IN YIDDISH (1-29 August 2001)

Having learned many lessons from the first three years of the intensive
four-week Vilnius Yiddish summer course, the organizers are determined
that the 2001 program will be one of the best Yiddish summer courses ever.

Administrative hassles in previous years were caused mainly by the summer
course office being dismantled and recreated each year, due to lack of
financial support. This has now been put right by Mendy Cahan (who became
program director in late 1999). Mr, Cahan, founder and director of the
"Yung Yidish" Institute in Jerusalem, has just completed setting up an
all-year-round office dedicated to the one month summer course, and I am
proud to have been appointed to the post of Project Manager (long time
coordinator Justinas Vancevichius continues to be on board!).

The academic director this year will again be Professor Dovid Katz, who
started his summer course career as a teacher of the advanced course at
the 1980 YIVO-Columbia summer program, and went on to found the Oxford
Program in Yiddish in 1982, and the Vilnius summer program in 1998.
Professor Katz settled in Vilnius in 1999 to take up the post of Professor
of Yiddish Language, Literature and Culture at Vilnius University, where
he is also director of the Center for Stateless Cultures. We all
congratulate Professor Katz on his recent winning of a Guggenheim to write
a new Yiddish novel (the first Guggenheim ever awarded, we believe, for
the writing of a book in Yiddish).

The summer 2001 faculty will include Dr Hanan Bordin of the Jerusalem
University, Professor Eli Katz of Berkeley, Professor Jerold Frakes of the
University of Southern California, Professor Anna Verschik of the
University of Tallinn in Estonia, Professor Dov-Ber Kerler of the
University of Indiana in Bloomington, and other leading scholars with whom
negotiations are now being completed.

There will again be four levels of university accredited instruction,
ranging from Yiddish I (for complete beginners) to Yiddish IV (advanced),
covering the mornings.

But what makes the Vilnius program different in principle is that it is
held in Vilnius - the historic Yiddish Vilne - where participants can
interact with and "inhale" from several thousand Yiddish speaking
survivors in the area the most authentic Yiddish the twenty-first century
has to offer. Specialists among them give talks, workshops and walking
tours as part of the Cultural Program, which occupies the afternoons and
evenings. The cultural program also includes concerts, singing sessions,
theater workshops, walking tours of old Jewish Vilna, excursions to a
shtetl and the few Jews who still live there, films, theater workshops and
much much more. Guest lecturers include the leaders of the present day
Jewish communities of Vilna, Kovna, Grodna and Brisk (Brest). It is
possible, by the way, to enroll in the Cultural Program only (with no
attendance of language classes and no credits).

By seeing and feeling the streets of the Old City, speaking with
survivors, and seeing the architecture of shtetl houses and taking in the
natural panorama, participants are much better able to "feel" the world
described in the great Yiddish classics.

Last but not least, it is important to mention that Vilnius, alongside its
old lanes and streets, now has every modern convenience and amenity, with
a huge range of accommodation ranging from student dormitories at 10$ a
night all the way to the most lavish hotels at over 200$ a night.  Is is a
safe and happy city. For westerners, the city present many first class
hotels, charming cafes with delicious fare to suit every taste, and shops
at very affordable prices.

Please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions or comments you
may have. I'll be happy to send you a copy of "Vilnius in your Pocket"
which details some of the day and night life available in this
newly-thriving East European capital (and of course, a copy of our Vilnius
2001 summer program leaflet).

Best wishes to all Mendele subscribers for 2001 from

    Egdunas Racius, Project Manager, Vilnius Program in Yiddish,
    4 Pylimo Street,
    Vilnius 2001,
    Lithuania.

    Phone: 011 3702 612114;
    fax: 011 3702 227915.

    Email: info@yiddishvilnius.com

(our website, www.yiddishvilnius.com will be substantially updated in
February, but gives at least a partial picture of what participants can
anticipate).

Egdunas Racius

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 10 Jan 2001 20:56:06 -0500 (EST)
From: Susan Lerner <meydele@ix.netcom.com>
Subject: Women's Yiddish Voices Conference

Yiddishkayt Los Angeles and the University of Southern California's Center
for Feminist Research invites you to explore Women's Yiddish Voices on
February 24 and 25 in Los Angeles. Through the centuries, the myriad
voices of Jewish women have found their expression in the rich mameloshn
(mother tongue) of the East European Ashkenazi Jews. Yiddish has long been
associated with women and women=92s literature. From folktales to
lullabies, from the earliest women's prayer books to the writing of the
brilliant 20th century poets and novelists, Yiddish has given voice to
Jewish women's passions, dreams, and longings.  di froyenshtimen/ Women's
Yiddish Voices will explore the historical and contemporary contributions
of women to Yiddish culture.

Women's Yiddish Voices begins on Saturday night, February 24, at Temple
Isaiah in West Los Angeles, with a concert by MIKVEH, a 'super-group' made
up of well-known women klezmer musicians.  An all-day conference (in
English) co-sponsored by the USC Center for Feminist Research follows on
Sunday, February 25, on the University of Southern California campus. The
conference schedule follows.

For a brochure and more information contact: Yiddishkayt Los Angeles,
yiddishkaytla@eathlink.net, www.yiddishkaytla.org, 323/692-8151.

di froyenshtimen/WOMEN'S YIDDISH VOICES

Concert by MIKVEH
Saturday, February 24, 8 pm, Temple Isaiah, 13045 W. Pico Blvd., Los Angeles

Conference, February 25, 9 am  5 pm, Taper Hall, USC
9-9:30 am, Registration

9:30  10:30 am, Plenary Lecture by Dr. Kathryn Hellerstein

10:30  12 noon:  Morning Sessions

Morning A:  SHRAYBN: WOMEN WRITERS OF THE 19 & 20 CENTURIES
         Dr. Kathryn Hellerstein on Kadya Molodovsky
         Troim Katz Handler on Esther Singer Kreitzman
         Norma Fain Pratt on Anna Margolin

Morning B: LEZBIANKES:  LESBIAN IDENTITY IN TODAY'S YIDDISH AMERICAN
COMMUNITY
         Irena Klepfisz
         Fran Chalin
         Sara Felder

Morning C:  YIDDISH IN THE MEDIA
         Eve Jochnowitz:  Audible kashres:  food ads on Yiddish radio
         Ellie Kellman:  Women as Heroes in Yiddish American Popular Fiction

Morning D: WORKSHOP on WOMEN'S SONGS OF EXILE AND HOMECOMINGYIDDISH
MUSIC
         Adrienne Cooper

12:15  1:30 pm: Lunch and Keynote Speech by Irena Klepfisz

2  3:15 pm: Afternoon Session 1

Afternoon -1A: A GAYSTIK FARGENIGN : SOULFUL DELIGHTS: WOMEN'S
LIFE-STORIES
IN THE US
          Jocelyn Cohen:  Saved by Reading: Working Class Autobiography

Afternoon -1B:  GLICKL'S SHVESTER: MEDIEVAL WOMEN
         Gerald Frakes:   Vashti as Political Radical in Early Purim Shpiln
         Justin Jared Lewis: Smart, Strong, Sexy & frum: Biblical Women in
                        a Medieval Yiddish Manuscript

Afternoon - 1C: HELDISHE FROYEN: WOMEN RADICALS
         Lilke Majzner: Women's Political Role in Europe and During
                        the Holocaust: 1880-1945
         Norma  Fain Pratt: Continuing the Tradition in the goldene medine

Afternoon  - 1D:  T'KHINES : PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS
         Kaye Goodman

3:30  4:30 pm Afternoon Session 2:

Afternoon -2A:
FROYEN IN YIDDISHN TEATER
Sabell Bender: Women in the Yiddish Theater: Actors, Directors and Characters

Afternoon -2B:    UNDZERE HAYNTIKE POETN / OUR CONTEMPORARY POETS
         Poets Read Their Poetry (in Yiddish and English)
                 Beyle Schaechter-Gottesman
                 Sarah Moscowitz
                 Troim Katz Handler
                 Gitl Shaechter-Viswanath

Afternoon -2C:    DERTSEYLERINS  / Storytellers
         Itsik Gottesman: Women in Yiddish Folktales
         Justin Jaron Lewis: I Heard It from the Rebbetzin: Women as
                 Heroes and Storytellers in Hasidic Tales

Afternoon -2D:   A YIDISHN TAM / A JEWISH FLAVOR
         Eve Jochnowitz / Yiddish Foodways in the Old World and the New

4:45  5 pm:  Closing

Susan Lerner

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 19 Dec 2000 12:27:39 -0500 (EST)
From: Bibliotheque Medem <medem@yiddishweb.com>
Subject: Der Yidisher Tamtam numer 26

Der Yidisher Tamtam, a Yiddish periodical published in Paris by the
Association for Yiddish Studies (AEDCY) and the Medem Library, begins its
sixth year of publication. Der Yidisher Tamtam is intended primarily for
students of Yiddish but it can be of interest to all Yiddish readers. It
contains articles of various levels of language, with difficult words and
expressions explained in French and English. It comes out 5 times a year
and is available by subscription to readers abroad.

HOW TO SUBSCRIBE
The cost of a 1-year subscription (5 issues of minimum 8 pages) is 100
French Francs (about $13,5 U.S.) in the European Union and 150 FF (about
$20,5 U. S.) for other countries. We also offer a special group-discount,
specially for Yiddish classes or reading groups : for 10 copies sent to
the same adress, 250 FF (about $34 U. S.) in the European Union and 350 FF
(about $48 U. S.) for other countries. Payment can be made to the address
below :
1. by check in French Francs (no checks in foreign currency can be
accepted).
2. by credit card (Visa or Eurocard/Mastercard). Please send full name
and address, number and expiration date of card.

For further information, or to receive a free copy of the last issue,
write to:
AEDCY
DER YIDDISHER TAM-TAM
B.P. 3256
75122 Paris CEDEX 03

or send an e-mail to: medem@yiddishweb.com

Der Yidisher Tamtam, a periodish bletl far yidish lerners, hot ongehoybn
zayn zekste yor publikatsye.  Dos bletl iz aroysgegebn fun der Gezelshaft
farn Yidish-Limed (GEFIL) tsuzamen mit der Medem Bibliotek. Der Yidisher
Tamtam past far ale yidish-leyeners, ober der iker far lerners fun der
shprakh. Me gefint artiklen oyf farsheydene madreyges, fun same onheybers
biz gants avansirte, mit derklerungen oyf frantseyzish un oyf english. Der
Yidisher Tamtam kumt aroys 5 mol a yor un mir nemen abonementn fun
oysland.

ABONEMENT 
An abonement oyf eyn yor (5 numern fun minimum 8 zaytn) kost 100
Frantseyzishe Frank (13,5 dolar) in dem eyropeishn fareyn un 150 F. F.
(20,5 dolar) far andere erter. A grupe (a yidishklas tsi a leyenkrayz) ken
abonirn unter di vayterdike badingungen=A0: far 10 numern geshikt oyf dem
zelbikn adres 250 F. F. (34 dolar) in dem eyropeishn fareyn un 350 F.F.
(48 dolar) far andere erter.
Me meg batsoln (oyf dem adres gegebn oybn ):
1. mit a  frantseyzishn tshek  (men ken nit batsoln mit a tshek fun
oysland)
2. Mit Visacard oder Eurocard/mastercard (shikn nomen, fornomen, numer
un oysgang-date)

Far mer protim, un oyb ir vilt bakumen an exemplar umzist, zikh vendn
tsum adres do oybn oder durkh blitspost : medem@yiddishweb.com

Gilles Rozier

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 11 Jan 2001 12:48:34 -0500 (EST)
From: Sholem Berger <sholemberger@hotmail.com>
Subject: Nayster numer Afn Shvel

Nayster numer Afn Shvel
(nokh tsugob-protem: Nekhe Farber, 212 787-6675)

S'iz nor vos aroys fun druk der nayster numer funem 
gezelshaftlekh-literarishn kvartlnik Afn Shvel, der organ fun der 
Yidish-lige. Der numer iz opgegebn dem zikorn funem yidishn filolog D"r 
Shloyme Birnboym. Der toykhn fun dem numer:

1. "D"r shloyme birnboym (a kurtser opshats)";
2. D"r Shikl Fishman -- "Zikhroynes vegn d"r Birnboym";
3. D"r Shloyme Birnboym -- "A verter-reshime: daytshmerish-yidish";
4. Shloyme Birnboym -- Briv tsu Khayem Gininger un Mordkhe Schaechter;
5. Rivke Basman -- lider;
6. Mordkhe Schaechter -- "Hinde Briks, zol zikh mien";
7. D"r Maks Vaynraykh, D"r Zelig Kalmenovitsh, Zalmen Reyzen -- A briv 
tsu Yuda Yofe;
8. D"r A.-A. Robak -- "Vi halt men mit undzer yidish?";
9. D"r Mordkhe Schaechter -- "Laytish Mame-loshn", di informative rubrik 
vegn rekhtikn yidishn sprakhbanits.

Oyb me iz a mitglid fun der yidish-lige (Khaver-gelt:25 dolar a yor) 
krigt men dem Afn Shvel umzist.An eyntsl-numer kost 8 dolar. Mit 
bashtelungen zikh vendn tsu

League for Yiddish, Inc.
200 W 72 St, Suite 40
NYC NY 10023-2805

Sholem Berger

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 17 Jan 2001 22:45:34 -0500 (EST)
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: Toplpunkt

The first issue of the new Yiddish journal "Toplpunkt" was presented at
the ceremony in Tel Aviv on January 9. The editor, Yakov Beser described
the journal that will focus on all aspects of contemporary Yiddish
literature, culture, and art. The first issue selected works by authors of
all generations: Avrom Sutzkever, Mordkhe Tsanin, Yekhiel Shraibman, Khaim
Beyder, Yitzhak Luden, Boris Sandler, Lea Robinson, Sholem Berger, and
many others. Full table of contents of the first issue can be seen at
http://www.ibiblio.org/yiddish/Toplpunkt

Address of the editorial office: Brener 14, Tel Aviv 63826, 
phone +972-3-5253088, fax +972-3-6203530

Iosif Vaisman

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 7 Jan 2001 10:29:18 EST
From: AchimsVerlag@aol.com
Subject: jiddische Lieder 

Fritz Mordechai Kaufmann
Die schînsten Lieder der Ostjuden - Siebenundvierzig ausgewÑhlte Volkslieder

Ausgabe mit Notensatz. 
Erstmalig vollstÑndig Åbersetzt und neu herausgegeben von Achim Freudenstein 
und Karsten Troyke. 

Durch Zufall stie· ich bei meinen Studien auf die Liedersammlung "Die 
schînsten Lieder der Ostjuden" von Fritz Mordechai Kaufmann. Was mich daran 
faszinierte, war sowohl die Art der Zusammenstellung als auch die hier 
gewÑhlte Transkription aus dem Jiddisch-HebrÑischen. Die fÅr diesen Band von 
Kaufmann gewÑhlten Texte und Melodien sind nÑmlich im Gegensatz zu den spÑter 
publizierten Fassungen dem Volk abgelauscht. Das hei·t, er hat hier die 
ursprÅnglichsten Fassungen in der volksnahesten Form verîffentlicht. 
Desweiteren enthÑlt dieser Band Texte und Melodien die nie wieder 
verîffentlicht wurden. Sei es wegen des Anteils tief religiîser ostjÅdischer 
Liedkultur, sei es weil diese Sammlung wegen ihrer fehlenden hochdeutschen 
öbertragung in Vergessenheit geraten war, jedenfalls taucht die Åberwiegende 
Mehrzahl der hier zur VerfÅgung gestellten Melodien und Texte in den 
Nachkriegsverîffentlichungen mit jiddischem Liedgut nicht wieder auf. Auch 
die Transkription, die Kaufmann hier vornimmt, ist bedeutsam. Beispielsweise 
wÑhlt Kaufmann fÅr die im polnischen Jiddisch gegenÅber dem litauischen 
Jiddisch unterschiedliche Aussprache Sonderzeichen, die es mit der von ihm 
beigefÅgten ErlÑuterung ermîglichen, sowohl die polnische als auch litauische 
Les- und Singeart wahlweise zu nutzen. Kaufmann rich-tete sich mit seinem 
Buch ursprÅnglich an die assimilierten Juden in Deutschland, um diesen das 
kulturelle Gut der ostjÅdischen Bevîlkerung und jÅdischen Einwanderer aus dem 
Osten nahe zu bringen. Daher sind die Anmerkungen Kaufmanns fÅr heutige 
deutsche Leser nicht mehr zureichend. Das war der Grund weshalb der SÑnger 
jiddischer Lieder Karsten Troyke und ich uns da-zu entschlossen, diese 
Ausgabe mit ergÑnzenden Anmerkungen zu versehen, als auch eine wîrt-liche 
neuhochdeutsche öbertragung beizufÅgen. Auf eine Nachdichtung haben wir 
verzichtet, weil es nicht darum geht, irgend etwas dem Jiddischen Ñhnelndes 
zu produzieren, sondern das UrsprÅngliche des OstjÅdischen wieder zugÑnglich 
zu machen. Vorgesetzt habe ich einen Aufsatz von Kaufmann mit dem Titel "Das 
jÅdische Volkslied", welcher den Stand der Sammlung ostjÅdi-schen Liedgutes 
im Jahre der Herausgabe der hier nun erneut vorliegenden Sammlung 
dokumen-tiert. Beide Titel wurden ursprÅnglich im JÅdischen Verlag Berlin in 
den Jahren 1919 und 1920 publiziert. Diese Neuausgabe mag als Hilfe und 
Anregung dienen, jiddisches Liedgut in einer volksnahen Form nachzuerleben. 
Kaufmann, der von 1888 bis 1921 lebte und dessen hier vorliegendes Buch hier 
nun eine Neuauflage erlebt, war selbst bemÅht, die Eingliederung 
ostjÅdi-scher Einwanderer in Deutschland zu unterstÅtzen. Durch die hierdurch 
entstehenden Kontakte war es Kaufmann in besonderer Weise mîglich, Zugriff 
auf die damals schon im Schwinden begriffenen ostjÅdischen Volksliedweisen zu 
erhalten. Das entsetzliche Unheil, das das deutsche Volk im 
Nationalsozialismus auch Åber die Ostjuden in Polen und im Baltikum gebracht 
hat, fÅhrte zum nahezu endgÅltigen Aussterben jahrhundertealter kultureller 
Traditionen. 

200 S., Pappband, 2001  36,-- DM

Bestellungen bitte ab sofort an: Achims Verlag, Im éhrenfeld 34, 34295 
EdermÅnde
Tel.: 05665-6207 und 06442-927538

Achim Freudenstein

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 16 Jan 2001 14:01:34 -0500 (EST)
From: len duhl <len-duhl@socrates.Berkeley.EDU>
Subject: Dissertation on Yiddish Holocaust lullabies

This should have been sent early.. However, my wife Lisa has been ill,
and I took it upon myself to send it on.

Duhl, Lisa S. 
Rocking an empty cradle: A psychological study of Yiddish
Holocaust lullabies (Isaiah Spiegel, Chava Rosenfarb, Poland)  
California School of Professional Psychology, 1999. ISBN 0-599-51516-3 
                
This study, informed by psychoanalytic, hermeneutic, and literary
theories, investigates the possibility that Yiddish lullabies written and
sung during the Holocaust may have helped people to cope with massive
psychic trauma. Holocaust lullabies are located within the traditional
Jewish literature of catastrophe and the Holocaust experiences of
families.  Twenty-two Yiddish lullabies were identified from surviving
Holocaust writings. The author's history and the lyrics, provenance and
fit to the Yiddish folk lullaby genre formed the basis for inclusion.
These and related Yiddish Holocaust writings were translated. Writings of
Isaiah Spiegel and Chava Rosenfarb from the Lodz ghetto were interpreted.  
Holocaust lullabies were written in ghettos and camps, in occupied France,
and in flight in the Soviet Union. Thirteen authors, including two women,
were identified. Five were fathers, four of small dead children. Fathers
of murdered sons wrote as bereaved parents singing to a dead child or its
representation. Other authors wrote in varied voices singing to children
unborn, born, and orphaned; wife; mother; the Jewish people; and the wind.
The lullabies contain explicit Holocaust themes of persecution, death,
abandonment, quilt, and mourning.  Isaiah Spiegel's life and writings
illuminate specific personal meanings in his two lullabies written within
eight months of his little daughter's ghetto death in August, 1940.
Problematic elements are reflected in his lullabies' imagery of loss. This
imagery is sufficiently universal that, theoretically, people hearing and
singing these proscribed lullabies could use them to manage and
psychologically integrate aspects of their own Holocaust trauma. These
songs, survival attests to this possibility.  Chava Rosenfarb, protegee of
poet Simkhe-Bunem Shayevitsh, wrote her lullaby during the Lodz ghetto
liquidation in August, 1944. Rosenfarb's lullaby is read in conjunction
with ghetto experiences, other Holocaust poetry, and her writings
immediately following liberation. Although Rosenfarb's manuscripts were
taken at Auschwitz, she rehearsed her memorized ghetto poems continuously
to block out intolerable realities of captivity.  The readings of these
Yiddish Holocaust lullabies appear to support the premise that they were
written and sung to sustain the spirit, support the psychological
structure, and integrate the traumatic loss of a people threatened with
psychic disorganization during the Holocaust.

Leonard Duhl
UC Berkeley
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 10.043

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html



