
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 10.001
May 15, 2000

1) State of the Mendele community (Iosif Vaisman)
2) Spelling (Noyekh Miller)
3) yidish-simpozyum in Pariz 4-5-6 yuni 2000 (Gilles Rozier)
4) The first Yiddish Web board (Iosif Vaisman)
5) farshidns (elye palevsky)
6) Hagode in Yiddish (Marc Caplan)
7) A hagode in yiddish (Bernard Katz)
8) orl (Itsik Goldenberg)
9) tsvey frages (Diana Wilner)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 15 May 2000 23:11:52 -0400
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: State of the Mendele community

With this issue Mendele starts its tenth year, a remarkable longevity on the
Internet time scale, keyn eyn hore. We are older than Netscape and Yahoo,
and eBay or Amazon could have been Mendele's grandchildren.  The number of
Mendele subscribers has reached 2,300. We live in at least 36 countries on
six continents. The exact geographical distribution is unknown, because it
is difficult to attribute correctly addresses in .com, .net, and .org
domains. The table below reflects only the respective country domains --
.ca, .il, .de, .it, etc. The actual number of subscribers from some
countries is significantly higher.

                     1993     1998    2000

Canada                19       73      88                     
Israel                 8       61      88                     
Germany                3       45      64                  
Italy                  -       10      31
UK                     4       22      28                  
Netherlands            2       26      27
France                 -       12      26                    
Australia              3       17      22                   
Argentina              -       11      15
Russia                 -        4      13
Switzerland            -        9      12
Hungary                -       11      11
Japan                  1        7      11
Poland                 3        7       9
Austria                -        5       8 
Brazil                 -        6       7
South Africa           -        3       7
Sweden                 -        6       5

Total                 319     1700    2300

Country domains with less than 5 subscribers include Belgium, China,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Hong Kong, Iceland,
Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Taiwan,
Turkey, and Uruguay.

In the last few months Mendele issues appeared less frequently than usually;
hopefully we will soon resume the normal operating mode. Enjoy the new
Mendele volume!

Iosif Vaisman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 09 May 2000 19:25:14 -0400
From: N Miller <nmiller@trincoll.edu>
Subject: Spelling

Should a Yiddish book, when being reissued, conform to the author's spelling
or to the rules generally followed today?

At the outset: I have nothing against YIVO spelling; quite the contrary, I
like it a lot.  But I'm bothered that my choice rests on unexamined grounds
and I suspect that this is true for most of us.

Somewhere there's a letter from S.A. Abramovitch, the zeyde, to his publisher
in which he says in effect: "print it my way or forget the whole thing".  And
the zeyde's way?  A spelling that from our perspective hewed to German
orthography wherever possible.   Not particularly strange when we consider the
high prestige of German language and culture throughout the 19th century,
particularly among maskilim (and virtually all Yiddish writers were products
of the haskole).   More than that, one might argue that a Germanized spelling
scheme implicitly placed Yiddish in at best a subsidiary position vis-a-vis
German, and that was--if not conscious and deliberate--entirely in keeping
with the maskilic contempt for Yiddish as opposed to Hebrew, not to mention
that of bourgeois worldly intellectuals for the rubes and boobs of
Yiddishland.

Nothing new here surely.  In any event, the interesting question for me lies
elsewhere.  Even though most of us today reject the maskilic scorn for
Yiddish, even though many of us actually feel uncomfortable reading the
standard editions of Mendele Moykher-Sforim or Sholem Aleykhem (I do for one),
might there not be for that very reason a point in keeping the Germanic
orthography intact?  Not because they're sacred texts, not because the
spelling is of interest to scholars, but because reading them in their
original spelling adds a dimension to our understanding.  The same argument
applies of course to Soviet Yiddish.  Uneasy as many of us might feel at the
respelling of Semitic words and so on, it is better to be reminded that
neither writing or reading ever occurs in an ideological vacuum.

As readers none of us is truly passive; whether we change the spelling or not
we modify our relation to the text.  Changing spelling reduces dissonance,
leaving it alone makes it if anything greater.  But doesn't reducing the
dissonance brings today's readers into the same relation with the text as was
the case when it was written?   Maybe.  Still, we owe those earlier readers
--our grandparents-- the same respectful but unsentimental treatment that we
accord their writers.  Is it even possible that readers loved, say, Sholem
Aleykhem but didn't share his ambivalence?

But by far the most important potential benefit is that retaining older styles
stimulates a self-conscious attitude toward the YIVO standard--and therefore
toward ourselves and where we stand,    to examine to the limited extent
possible our own sensibilities.  I'd be delighted if someone could convince me
to go with the flow;  I'm no more in favor of hair shirts than most
Mendelistn.  Just the same, if discomfort is needed to maintain the critical
stance that goes with (our accursed) modernity, so be it.

*****

An afterword.  I wrote what's above a couple of months ago but neglected to
post it.  Having more recently read Mordkhe Schaechter's fascinating account
(_fun folkshprakh tsu kulturshprakh_) I see that the issues are even more
complicated than I had thought. But the basic question remains and I'll let it
stand as written.  I hope it's understood that I'm not advocating khos
vekholile the abandonment of standarized spelling and I hope a useful
discussion will ensue.

Noyekh Miller

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 2 May 2000 04:32:49 -0400 (EDT)
From: Gilles Rozier <medem@club-internet.fr>
Subject: yidish-simpozyum in Pariz 4-5-6 yuni 2000

Di Medem-Bibliotek un der yidisher kunst- un geshikhte-muzey organizirn
An INTERNATSYONALN SIMPOZYUM
Arum der teme
BAY DER YIDISH-ARBET , HAYNT.
Paris, 4-5-6tn yuni 2000
In oyditoryum fun yidishn kunst- un geshikhte-muzey

Visnshaftlekhe organizatorn : Yitskhok Niborski un Gilles Rozier

PROGRAM
ZUNTIK DEM 4TN YUNI 2000
14 az : derefenung fun simpozyum durkh Laurence Sigal (direktorshe funem
yidishn kunst- un geshikhte-muzey) un Gilles Rozier (direktor fun der
Medem-bibliotek)

14:30 - 16:00 az
Runder tish : vi vert yidish ibergegebn in der traditsyoneler yidisher 
svive? Problemen baym ibergebn yidish inem veltlekhn sektor. Yidish tsvishn
nit-yidn
Miryam Isaacs (Universitet fun Meriland, Fareynikte shtatn), Yitskhok
Niborski (Institut far mizrekh-shprakhn, Frankraykh), Armin Eydherr
(shrayber un iberzetser, Estraykh)
Forzitserin : Miryam Anissimov, shrayberin

MONTIK DEM 5TN YUNI 2000
10:00-12:00 az
Universitet-limudim un forshung
Jean Baumgarten (Melukhe-rot far vinsnshaftlekher forshung, Frankraykh), 
"Di yidish-limudim in di yisroeldike universitetn"
Shimen Neuberg (Trierer universitet, Daytshland), "Antviklung un
oryentatsye fun di yidish-limudim in Daytshland"
Dov-Ber Kerler (Oksforder tsenter far hebreishe un yidishe shtudyes,
England), "Di zumer-programen, indzelekh fun yidishland"
Forzitser : Alexandre Derczanski (Melukhe-rot far vinsnshaftlekher forshung,
Frankraykh)

14:30-16:00
Runder tish : hayntike literarishe shafung
Lev Berinski (fareyn fun yidishe shrayber un zhurnalistn, Yisroel)
Hirshe-Dovid Katz [Meynkes] (Vilner universitet, Lite)
Moyshe Lemster (shrayber, Moldavye)

Rokhl Ertel (universitet Paris 7, Frankraykh), " iberzetsn fun yidish - a
teyl fun der yidish-shafung ?
Forzitserin : Mike Szulsztein (mitarbeterin fun di " yidishe heftn ")

16:30-17:30
retsitatsye
tekstn fun haynttsaytiker yidisher literatur, geleyent oyf yidish un in
frantseyzisher iberzetung durkh Basye Baum (iberzetserin un retsitatorin,
Frankraykh)

DINSTIK DEM 6TN YUNI 2000

9:30-11:00
yidish bay yingere, in shul un in lebn
Dvoyre Kosman (lererin, Yisroel), " yidish in di yisroeldike
dertsiungs-sistemen "
Benyomen Schaechter (koordinator fun der " yidishvokh ", Fareynikte shtatn),
" di bavegung fun yunge yidishistn in Amerike "
Andrey Bredstein (Melukhe-bibliotek, Rusland), " yidish-vidervuks in
mizrekh-Eyrope "
Forzitserin : Louisette Kahane (gezelshaft farn yidish-limed)

11:15-12:30
oyf der yidisher gas
Nadia Dehan-Rotschild (lererin un iberzetserin, Frankraykh), " dos lernen
yidish in a yidishn kultur-tsenter "
Detlef Hutschenreuter (muziker, onfirer funem " Rockteater ", Daytshland),
"yidish teater - far vos far an oylem ? "
Jacques Grober (mekhaber fun zinglider, zinger, Frankraykh), " tsum lid
durkh yidish - tsu yidish durkhn lid "
Forzitser : Henri Minczeles (historiker)

14:30-15:30
Medyums
Boris Sandler (shef-redaktor fun " Forverts ", Fareynikte shtatn), " Der
Forverts un zayn leyener)
Iosif Vaisman (shmuesplats oyf internets " Mendele ", Fareynikte shtatn), 
" internets, an alveltlekh shtetl "
Forzitser : Claude Hampel (redaktor fun di " yidishe heftn ")

17:00-17:30
Hemshekh fun di yidishistishe institutsyes
Dovid-Helyohu Fishman (Yidisher teologisher seminar un Yivo, Fareynikte
shtatn), " Der Yivo un di hayntike forshung fun der yidishvelt "
Gilles Rozier (Medem-bibliotek, Frankraykh), " di Medem-bibliotek un ir
kultur-shlikhes "
Norbert Engel (Strasburger shtotrot, Frankraykh), " di grindung fun an
eyropeishn tsenter far yidish-kulturn in Shtrasburg : farmestn un
perspektivn "
Forzitser : Henry Bulawko (zhurnalist un shrayber)

17:45-18:30
Opshlus
Claude-Gerard Marcus (prezident fun yidishn kunst- un geshikhte-muzey)
Yitskhok Niborski (vitse-prezident fun der Medem-bibliotek)

redes oyf yidish oder frantseyzish mit glaykhtsaytiker iberzetsung.

adres tsu bashteln (shraybt oyf frantseyzish oder english):
reservations@mahj.org
Musee d'art et d'histoire du Judaisme
Hotel de Saint-Aignan
71, rue du Temple
75003 Paris
Tel : (00 33) 1 53 01 86 48

La culture yiddish aujourd'hui

Colloque international
4 - 6 juin 2000

organise par le Musee d'Art et d'Histoire du Judaisme et 
la Bibliotheque Medem

Organisateurs scientifiques : Yitskhok Niborski et Gilles Rozier

Bazukht undzer vebort : http://www.yiddishweb.com/
Ir zukht yidishe bikher tsu koyfn ? Tut a kuk oyf undzere dubletn-listes :
http://www.yiddishweb.com/dubletn/

Gilles Rozier
Paris (France)

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 15 May 2000 17:16:55 -0400
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: The first Yiddish Web board

Current versions of the popular Microsoft's browser and email client are
able to handle Yiddish correctly (significant portion of thanks for this
should go to Mark David and several other enthusiasts from the Understanding
Yiddish Information Processing group, http://www.uyip.org). Since both MS
Internet Explorer and MS Outlook are free programs that are currently
bundled with the most popular operating systems and are available for
several other operating systems, for the first time we have an environment
that is favorable for the mass electronic communications in Yiddish. 

Shtetl's software developers decided to help Microsoft and created an alpha
version of the first Yiddish message board
(http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/forum/wwwboard). The message board is
supplied with the visual Yiddish keyboard, which means that there is no need
to worry about the keyboard layouts and drivers. All what you need is a copy
of Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.0 or 5.01, or AOL 5.0 installed on your
Windows (95, 98, NT, or 2000) computer. The message board may not work on
other platforms or in other browsers. There are several other outstanding
technical issues with the program, but it works! You are welcome to join
the first Internet discussion forum in Yiddish. Two other applications for
sending email in Yiddish and for creating Yiddish web pages are coming
soon. Watch this space!

Iosif Vaisman 

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 16 Apr 2000 14:32:45 -0400 (EDT)
From: EPalevsky1@aol.com
Subject: farshidns

"daled omus"  iz a mos erd, dakht zikh mir fir eyln, un dos heyst a kleyn
shtikl eygns, take bagrenetst nor bakant.  glatshteyn, in zayn vey -lid a 
<a gute nakht velt> ruft dos folk tsurik fun zayn farton in der breyter velt
vos hot derlozt dem hitler khurbn, tsurik tsu eygene "daled omus"

"daled omus" is a measure of ground, I believe it's four cubits, meaning a
small something of your own, limited but familiar. In his pained poem, <a
gute nakht velt> (good night world) Glatshteyn calls our people back from
its involvement with the wide world that allowed the Holocaust, back to
"daled omus.

vegn etimologishn yikhes fun "khoyzek makhn" ken ikh zikh nit oprufn, nor
s'iz kiday tsu bamerkn az di vos farmestn zikh yo mit di inyonim af an
ernstn oyfn megn visn az mikhl herzog iz a shem dover, mit gvaldike
fardinstn in der velt fun yidisher lingvistik.

I can't comment on the etymological yikhes of the expression "khoyzek makhn"  
but it's worth mentioning that those who undertake to deal with these issues
in a serious manner might be aware that Mikhl Herzog is a name of renown
with enormous contributions in the field of Yiddish linguistics.

a teyl fun der muzik tsu di peysakh lider ken men gefinen in der yidisher
hagode, dakht zikh mir s'heyst "di naye hagode" aroysgegebn fun arbeter ring
in nyu york.in bildungs opteyl zaynen faran mentshn vos veln visn vu me ken
gefinen di muzik tsu di iberike lider.

di yidish veltlekhe shuln in amerike, fun ale rikhtungen: farband, shloem
aleykhem institut, arbeter ring un orden, hobn ale aroysgegebn farshidene
yidish-veltlekhe hagodes ongepikevet mit oytsres fun der yidisher literatur.  
teyl greser shuln hobn aleyn geshafn hagodes tsugepast tsu di feyikaytn fun
zeyere kinder. azoy hobn mir geton ven ikh hob ongefirt mit a greserer
sholem alyekhem zuntik shul af long aylend n"y in di friye zekhtsiker yorn.
s'volt geven interesant makhn an oyshtelung fun azlekheno hagodes, vifl me
ken nor tsunoyfklaybn. tsi zukht efhser der yivo a nayem proyekt.

some of the music to the peysakh poems can be found in recent Yiddish
Hagodes., published by the Workemn's Circle in N.Y.  The folks in their
Education Dept will likely be able to tell you where to find music to the
rest.

The various Worldly Yiddish School movements in America: Farband, Sholem
Aleichem Institute, Workmen's Circle, IWO all published a variety of
Yiddish-cultural haqgodes, jam-packed with treasures from Yiddish
literature.  Some of the larger Shules created their own hagodes suited to
the abilities of their children.  So we did when I directed a larger S"A
Sunday School on Long Island N.Y. in the early 60's. It would be interesting
to mount an exhibit of as many of these kinds of hagodes as can be gathered.
Maybe the YIVO is looking for a new project.

aykh alemen a zisn, gezuntn un koshern peysakh.

elye palevsky

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 17 Apr 2000 12:10:27 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Caplan, Marc" <caplm@adl.org>
Subject: Hagode in Yiddish

In Vol 09.077, Martin Green asks for information about Yiddish-Hebrew
hagodes suitable to be used at a regular Passover seder. I was recently in
Eichler's in Boro Park (13th Avenue and 50th Street), where I saw at least
four editions of the Passover hagode with Yiddish translations and
commentaries. Most of them were about $15-20 (more expensive, leather-bound
versions were also available), and all of them seemed pretty interesting and
"user-friendly," provided that one could read Yiddish in non-YIVO
orthography. I asked more than one man who worked at the store for advice in
distinguishing between the four, but nobody seemed to have a clear opinion
as to which was the best among them. So I thumbed through the four, and
settled on one quite at random (I'm not at home right now so I don't know
the name of the edition I finally chose, and I haven't had a chance yet to
read it). Anyway, these bilingual hagodes--as well as many other sforim
with/in Yiddish--are readily available among the khasidim (as was at least
one Yiddish-only hagode), and I look forward to returning to Eichler's, B"H,
next year to add to my collection.

By the way, for those not living in the New York area, Eichler's has a web
site (www.Eichlers.com, if I'm not mistaken); I don't know if they sell the
Yiddish sforim on line, but it certainly seems worth the effort.

A freylekhn pesekh, alemen,

Marc Caplan

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 20 Apr 2000 15:29:24 -0400 (EDT)
From: Bernard Katz <bkatz@uoguelph.ca>
Subject: A hagode in yiddish

Nokh eyn vort iber di hagode far Martin Green - ikh hob gefinen eyns
azelekhe t'vishen meyn andere hagodes!  S'iz geveh gedrukt bay di Hebrew
Poblishing Companye in Nyu York, ober un a yor.  Es hayst: Sidur Hagada Shel
Pesakh -im- y"kh melut v'pirushim b'ivri-taytsh Ba-utyot Gedolot im Tsyurim
Ravim v'yfim.  That's the best I can do - my ivrit transliteration is not
too good , I'm afraid.  There is no indication of who translated.

In any case, there are 3 different Yiddish texts plus the traditional Hebrew
text, all on each page of the hagode.  One of the Yiddish texts (called
sefuri ha-felaot) is a straight translation in Yiddish, while the other two
are commentaries in Yiddish on the text (sefuri yetsiot matzrim and meshali
ya'akov).  Only the last few pages, with the shir hashirim additional
section of the hagode, does not have the Yiddish -- even khad gadyo has
them!  A guten yontef tsu alemen,

Bernard Katz

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 16 Apr 2000 21:18:23 -0400 (EDT)
From: Robert Goldenberg <goldenbe@vaxxine.com>
Subject: orl

A question about Sholem Aleykhem's use of "orl" as a synonym for a non-Jew.
This term appears many times, in context, in the story "Oylem habe," which
just appeared in The Mendele Review. For those who might not know, "orl" is
a foreskin, (though spelled without the "hey"at the end of the word when the
actual foreskin is meant).The term seems to us now humourous at best,
perhaps somewhat derogatory at worst. I was wondering whether a native
yiddish speaker, especially at the time Sholem Aleykhem was writing these
stories, before 1916, would find this term amusing, or was it the
matter-of-fact term used in a non-derogatory sense?

By the way, it was no surprise that orl was not to be found in Weinreich.
Nor was "foreskin." Weinreich avoided many "sensitive" words in his
dictionary. I have heard that he was rather prudish in this matter, but
perhaps there is some other reason for these omissions. I did find "orl" in
Harkavy's dictionary.

Aside from "orl," if you understand yiddish, reward yourself by reading
Oylem Habe in the latest The Mendele Review (Vol.4 No. 5). This is the first
of 4 parts.

Itsik Goldenberg

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 18 Apr 2000 15:07:40 -0400 (EDT)
From: Diana <deeee4@worldnet.att.net>
Subject: tsvey bazundere frages

Ershtens vil ikh vintshen ale meyne teyre mendeleyers a zisen und freylikhen
Pesach.  yetz di frages, s'iz mir mer bakvem english.

Does anyone recall the following expression.  "Koved ligt af mist, s'iz
nisht umzist"  I remember my Mother saying something like that but it seems
wrong somehow.  My Mother came from Shvir, close to Vilna.  Would appreciate
some imput.

I have just come across a book by Ludwig Lewisohn "The Island Within" a very
interesting presentation of the misnagdim vs the khasidem.  I am wondering
why he is never mentioned among Jewish writers.  Is it because he wrote in
English.  Seems to me he is worthy of our attention, How do we classify him?

Mendele und the Mendele Review hot mir bareykht meyn leben.  A hartziken
dank to unzere shameysim.

Diana Wilner
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 10.001

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://metalab.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



