
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 10.047
March 11, 2001

1) Oxford Institute for Yiddish Studies (Marie Wright)
2) Nayer numer "Der Bavebter Yid" (Sholem Berger)\
3) Mendele Moykher Sforim's story in Onkelos (Noyekh Miller)
4) Miryam Ulinover (Natalia Krynicka)
5) quotes (Miriam Weinstein)
6) Literatur far dervakslingen un tsenerlingen (Sheva Tsuker)
7) 2nd Yiddish Summer University in Strasburg (Astrid Ruff)
8) Intensive Elementary Yiddish in Seattle (Anikke Trier)
9) Seminar on East European Jewry, 2002-3 (Ben Nathans)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 12 Feb 2001 08:01:44 -0500 (EST)
From: yiddishstudies <info@oxfordyiddish.org>
Subject: Oxford Institute for Yiddish Studies

The Oxford Institute for Yiddish Studies has a new website.
Full details of all our programmes including the 2001 Summer Schools
in Oxford and London and the first ever international Klezfest in
London are on our website.
Website address: http://www.oxfordyiddish.org

Marie Wright

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 12 Feb 2001 14:47:04 -0500 (EST)
From: "Sholem Berger" <sholemberger@hotmail.com>
Subject: Nayer numer "Der Bavebter Yid"

                       Der Bavebter Yid 5:1
                       Literarisher internet-zhurnal
                       http://cs.uky.edu/~raphael/bavebter

Fun REDAKTSYE: Etlekhe iberzetsungen fun moderne hebreishe lider
Dos lid TSUGEBUNDN fun LEYE ROBINSON
Di tsveyte (un letste) stsene fun pyese LOYT DI KORTN fun MINDL
RINKEVITSH
un kinderishe meynungen vegn morgn fun yidishkayt ibergegebn fun Z.
STIVNSON

Un ir hot mistome nokh nisht geleynt di ale alte numern...

Kumt tsu gast!

Sholem Berger, literarisher redaktor, sholemberger@hotmail.com
Refoyl Finkel, tekhnisher redaktor, raphael@cs.uky.edu

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 08 Mar 2001 17:12:15 -0500
From: Norman Miller <nmiller@trincoll.edu>
Subject: Mendele Moykher Sforim's story in Onkelos

A modern Yiddish version of Mendele Moykher Sforim's "dos toysfes yontef

kelbl" is now available
at http://www2.trincoll.edu/~mendele/onkelos.htm.

An English translation of this story, as with the others in Onkelos, is
to be found in Howe and Greenberg's _A Treasury of Yiddish Stories_,
Penguin.

Noyekh Miller
Leonard Prager
Mirl Schonhaut Hirshan

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 6 Feb 2001 14:23:11 -0500 (EST)
From: Natalia Krynicka <natalia.krynicka@free.fr>
Subject: Miryam Ulinover

Ikh zukh ale informatsyes (byografishe protim, zikhroynes, retsenzyes,
artiklen, notitsn ua"v) vegn der Lodzher dikhterin Miryam Ulinover
(1890?-1944), vi oykh ire lider tseshpreyte in der prese un farsheydene
antologyes. A bikhl mit ale bakante shafungen fun der doziker dikhterin
un
mit a hakdome vegn ir lebn un shafn darf bekorev dershaynen in der Medem

Biblyotek in Pariz, un s'volt geven a groyse shod durkhtsulozn velkhe
s'zol
nit zayn gedrukte lider oder emetsn tsugenglekhe faktn fun ir lebn (vos
iz
say vi zeyer veynik bakant) un zey nit araynnemen in ot-der publikatsye.

Bazunders interesant volt geven tsu gefinen di magister-arbet vegn
Ulinover
fun Dine Heller (der tokhter fun Binem Heller), vos zi hot ongehoybn tsu

shraybn bay Khone Shmerukn in Yerushalaim, vi oykh tsvey lider, vos di
dikhterin zol hobn geshikt in ksav-yad Rikude Potash (loyt Dov Sadans
hakdome tsu der hebreisher iberzetsung fun "Der bobes oytser") un a lid
vegn
dem os "yud" vos iz (loyt Goldkornen) dershinen in a numer fun der
tsaytshrift "Os". Avade vet men ale nemen fun mentshn vos veln tsushikn
a
nay lid oder a naye informatsye, opdrukn in dem bikhl mit a dankvort.

A dank in foroys
Natalia Krynicka

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 28 Feb 2001 09:46:40 -0500 (EST)
From: "Miriam Weinstein" <miriamw@worldnet.att.net>
Subject: quotes

I am looking for the Yiddish originals of three quotes that I have found
in
English. They will be used as chapter heads in an upcoming
English-language
book about Yiddish. (We will be printing the quotes in Yiddish and in
English.) If anyone could either email me the Romanized text of the
Yiddish,
or send me via regular mail a Xeroxed copy of the original Yiddish text,
I
would be very appreciative!

First, is the Max Weinreich quote, "A language is a dialect that has an
army
and a navy."

Second is two lines from Chaim Grade's poem, Elegy for the Soviet
Yiddish
Writers. Can anyone tell me the name of the poem in Yiddish, and the two

lines in Yiddish? The English is " 'am free, am free, am free!  you
said;/wild as your poems, you shook out your wild hair."
These are from stanza eight, lines 13 and 14. (each stanza has 16
lines.)

Third is a quote from Jacob Glatstein: "A Yiddish poet is someone who
reads
Auden but Auden doesn't read him." I have a feeling that this comes from

World of Our Fathers, where Howe quotes him as "once saying with a
sardonic
smile to the author of this book, "What does it mean to be a poet of an
abandoned culture? It means that I have to be aware of Auden but Auden
need
never have heard of me." Howe does not have any note to this quote. Does

anyone know if Glatstein originally said this in English or Yiddish?

Another request: I am trying to correctly identify key people in a photo
of
participants in the Czernowitz Conference of 1908. Some sources identify
the
woman seated at left center next to Nathan Birnbaum as his wife; others
identify
her as Esther Frumkin. I have seen later photos of Frumkin, but I cannot
decide
if this is the same woman.
Can anyone help?

I will keep you posted on publication information for the book.
In the meantime, many thanks!

Miriam Weinstein
Manchester, MA

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 29 Jan 2001 20:53:44 -0500 (EST)
From: SCZUCKER@aol.com
Subject: Literatur far dervakslingen un tsenerlingen

Literatur far dervakslingen un tsenerlingen (adolescents and teenager)
Ikh volt gevolt hern fun undzere Mendelyaner vos zaynen take ufgevoksn
in a
yidish-redndiker svive. Vos hot ir geleyent af Yidish ven ir zayt geven
an
erekh  in eltern fun 11-17. Oyb ir zayt gegangen in a Yidisher shul, vos
hot
ir geleyent in shul un vos hot ir geleyent stam azoy far farvaylung? Hot
ir
geleynt yidishe shraybers oder andere shraybers in yidisher iberzetsung?
Fun
vanen hot ir genumen di bikher? Vos hot ir geleynt vos, loyt ayer
meynung,
volt nokh alts geven interesant der hayntiker yugnt? A sheynem dank.

Ayer
Sheva Tsuker

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 22 Feb 2001 06:11:16 -0500 (EST)
From: Astrid Ruff <kruff@noos.fr>
Subject: 2nd Yiddish Summer University in Strasburg

2nd Yiddish Summer University  : 16th - 27th July 2001
 at the ORT School in Strasburg, France

- Yiddish language course in 3 levels : (9 AM-12 30 PM)
             -level 1 : Sonia Pinkusowitz (Martin Buber Institute
Brussels)
- introduction to reading, writing and conversation
            -level 2 : Miriam Trinh (Jerusalem University)
- more grammar; reading easy Yiddish texts
            - level 3 : Alan Astro (Trinity University, San Antonio,
Texas) :
- Yiddish literature in Argentina and South America

- Workshops (15 PM-17 PM )
         - Yiddish Theatre with Rafa‰l Goldwaser
         -  Yiddish songs  with Astrid Ruff
         -  Yiddish Cuisine

 - Cultural events :
 - Conferences and Video-conferences
 - Theatre : S¡brent 3 monologues by Sholem Ale‹khem, interpreted by
Rafa‰l Goldwaser
 - Sing, Reyzele, sing ! a concert of womens¡ songs by Astrid Ruff
 - Klezmer dance
 - Sight-seeing in Strasburg and discovery of local rural Jewish
heritage

Contact  :
Th‚ƒtre en l¡Air - der LufTeater
46, rue Baldner
67100 Strasbourg FRANCE
tel :00333 88 44 18 14
fax (addressed to  Rafa‰l Goldwaser) :00333 88 24 60 23
email : kruff@noos.fr
web site  : http://lufteater.free.fr

Rafa‰l Goldwaser, Astrid Ruff

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 1 Mar 2001 18:24:52 -0500 (EST)
From: "atrier" <atrier@u.washington.edu>
Subject: Intensive Elementary Yiddish

University of Washington
Summer Quarter - "A" Term
June 18-July 18, 2001

German 406A
Intensive Elementary Yiddish
8 credits
MTWThF
9:40 a.m.-1:00 p.m.

Intensive study of Yiddish grammar, with oral and written exercises and
reading of selected texts.  The course will include several hours per
week
of Yiddish cultural events, including conversations with native
speakers,
films, visiting speakers, and Yiddish music.   Students may earn an
additional two credits in Jewish cultural studies by registering for
SISJE
490.

For further information call the Department of Germanics, (206) 543-4580
or
email uwgerman@u.washington.edu

For a free University of Washington Summer Quarter Bulletin and
application,
please call (206) 543-2320 or 1-800-543-2320

Anikke Trier

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 7 Feb 2001 17:09:13 -0500 (EST)
From: Benjamin Nathans <bnathans@history.upenn.edu>
Subject: Seminar on East European Jewry, 2002-3

Dear Colleagues,

The Center for Advanced Judaic Studies at the University of Pennsylvania

recently approved a proposal for a year-long seminar on East European
Jewish history and culture, to be held at the Center during academic
year
2002-3.  You may be familiar with the Center's format: 15 to 20 scholars

from around the world are brought in for one or two semesters to conduct

research, share insights, and present new work in a weekly seminar-style

gathering.  It is a rare opportunity for sustained dialogue about the
state
of the field, for taking stock of the remarkable body of research that
is
now emerging, and for bringing different disciplines into fruitful
contact
with one another.  Details of the 2002-3 proposal are given below.

I hope you will seriously consider applying to participate in the
seminar
for part or all of 2002-3.  I am sending out this advance notice because

leave-schedules are notoriously complicated and I'm sure your own
calendar
gets booked well in advance.  Please feel free to share this information

with graduate students and colleagues.  A more formal announcement will
be
appearing in several months, along with information about how to apply.
The deadline for applications will be in October 2001.

JEWISH HISTORY AND CULTURE IN EASTERN EUROPE, 1600-2000
A Year-Long Seminar at the Center for Advanced Judaic Studies,
University of Pennsylvania, 2002-3

For most of the modern period, the Jews of Eastern Europe constituted
the single greatest reservoir of Jewish civilization in the world, the
seat
of Jewish learning and the inspiration for Dubnov's theory of "hegemonic

centers" in Jewish history.  Among the Jews of Poland, Lithuania,
Galicia,
Russia, and Ukraine there formed many of the key religious,
intellectual, and
political currents that shape Jewish life even today, and from their
ranks
emerged the dominant new "centers" of the twentieth century in Israel
and
North America.

During the last two decades, East European Jewry has begun to move to
the center of the study of modern Jewish history and culture.  Fresh
questions and new areas of inquiry -- now fueled by unprecedented access
to
long-hidden archival riches in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union --
have stimulated a new generation of scholarship.  Drawing on expertise
in the
areas of history, literature, religion, folklore, and allied fields, we
seek to create an inter-disciplinary seminar at the CAJS whose goal will

be to assemble and place in perspective the fruits of this new
scholarship.

We anticipate that several broad concerns will structure the research
and dialogue that develop over the course of the year.  First, in
scholarship
concerning East European Jewry from the seventeenth century to the
present,
the dominant mode of explanation for all kinds of historical and
cultural
change has been the idea of "crisis."  What appears to be a virtually
unending series of "crises" includes the 1648 Chmielnicki uprising, the
messianic "crises" associated with Shabbetai Tsevi and Jacob Frank, the
breakup of the Council of the Four Lands and of the Polish-Lithuanian
Commonwealth, the emergence of Hasidism and Haskalah as responses to an
alleged "crisis" in traditional society, the forcible imposition of
military
service and the Pale of Settlement, abolition of the kahal, the pogroms
of
1881-82 and the accompanying "crisis" of the Haskalah and liberal
politics,
the First World War and the Russian Revolution, Sovietization and mass
urbanization, and finally - and most emphatically - the Holocaust.
Three
centuries of East European Jewish history, in other words, have served
as
evidence for the idea that the path away from "tradition" leads
inexorably
through "crisis" - personal and collective.  How far then have we moved
from
what Salo Baron famously disparaged as the "lachrymose conception" of
the
Jewish past?  Has the paradigm of crisis merely taken its place?  Recent

studies of East European Jewry have stepped back to explore the ideas of

crisis and catastrophe as Jewish cultural motifs, while others have
called
into question the crisis model with respect to a wide range of
historical
episodes and movements.  As yet, however, there has been no
comprehensive
discussion of alternative modes of change.  Are there deep continuities
in
East European Jewish history and culture that bridge the recurrent
ruptures?

Second, the seminar will provide a much-needed opportunity to bring
together the study of elite and popular culture, and to encourage
dialogue
among disciplines that rarely speak to each other in any sustained way.
Areas in need of cross-disciplinary exploration include the intersection
of
Kabbalah and various forms of popular magic, including practices
absorbed
from surrounding Slavic populations; the emergence of an East European
orthodoxy within the force-field of the struggle between Hasidism and
Haskalah; the evolution of the various strands of Hasidism after their
crystallization in the early decades of the 19th century; the political
mobilization of the Jewish "silent majority" at the beginning of the
20th;
the popular reception of a socialist Yiddish culture in the early Soviet

period; and the resurgence of Jewish national identity in the USSR
during the
Cold War.

We expect that the interstices between history and literature will
provide a particularly rich arena for discussion and debate.  Scholars
of the
Yiddish and Hebrew literature that flowered in Eastern Europe have
placed
the shtetl, the family, and the search for a modern, emancipated self
(and
its characteristic genre, the autobiography) at the heart of their work.

Historians are only beginning systematically to investigate the specific

historical contexts that conditioned Jewish cultural modernism.  The
extraordinary place of literature and literary criticism in late 19th-
and
early 20th-century East European Jewish society also has yet to be fully

explored, including its relationship to parallel developments in the
surrounding Slavic populations.

Third, the seminar will begin the work of critically examining the
foundations of modern Jewish scholarship in Eastern Europe, and in
particular
its strikingly ethnographic, not to say populist, orientation.  The
scholarly
study of East European Jewry began with a generation of fin-de-siecle
intellectuals, writers, and artists who in many cases had repudiated the

Haskalah as politically naive even as they inherited the role of the
maskilim
as social critics.  As Jewish Studies becomes more self-conscious about
the
roots of its own enterprise, we need to investigate scholarship in
Eastern
Europe as intensively as has been done for the Wissenschaft des
Judentums.
The founding generation of the East European Jewish intelligentsia, from

Ansky to Zinberg, fashioned an interpretive lens (including the paradigm
of
crisis) through which we still perceive much of the East European Jewish

past.  In addition, many of them led politically engaged lives that
intersected with their work (and personal lives) in ways that have
scarcely
been explored.  Greater attention to the pioneering figures who first
conceived of East European Jewry as a distinct historical entity
promises to
cast in sharper relief the categories and assumptions that became the
field's
intellectual lineage.

Finally, there is the question of whether and in what manner the Jews
of Eastern Europe constituted a single society with a distinct culture.
To
what extent did they remain a coherent entity across the various
upheavals
(internal and external) and recastings of political boundaries, in the
course
of which they became subjects, and occasionally citizens, of a wide
range of
states and empires, from the Poland of the magnates to the Russia of the

Commissars?  How did East European Jews define themselves vis-a-vis
their
host societies, and other segments of world Jewry, and how did this
self-
definition change over time?

These are just a few of the arenas in which the seminar might focus its
work.  The list of lacunae in the field is, not surprisingly,
considerably
longer.  In fact, so many scholars are now turning their attention to
the
East European Jewish past, and from such diverse vantage points, that it
is
impossible to predict the full range of questions that will guide the
work of
the seminar's participants.

In addition to the outstanding holdings of the CAJS and Van Pelt
libraries,
we expect that many fellows will want to utilize the archival
and library collections of the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research in New

York, now in its new home at the Center for Jewish History.  In fact,
collaborating with YIVO in the organization of lectures by individual
fellows, a public conference, an exhibition, and/or publication of
fellows'
research, could considerably expand the audience for the seminar's work.

Similar forms of collaboration may be explored with the National Yiddish

Book Center in Amherst.  Given the widespread interest among the broader

Jewish community in the history and culture of East European Jewry, we
anticipate that fellows will have ample opportunities during the seminar
year
to share their research beyond the walls of the academy.

If you have any questions or comments about the seminar, please let me
know.

Best,

Ben Nathans
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 10.047

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://www.mendele.net
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html




