
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 12.008
October 10, 2002

1) Di derefenung funem Parizer Yidish-Tsenter (Henri Jabko)
2) Lufteater program (Refoel Goldwaser)
3) Art of Yiddish 3 (Miriam Koral)
4) Lena Jedwab Rozenberg's diary (Doroth‚e Rozenberg)
5) Jewish Dance: New Publication (Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett)
6) Yiddish Culture in Florida (David Weintraub)
7) Yiddish after the Holocaust: call for papers (Joseph Sherman)
8) Linguistic correspondent (Ivan-Kaja Dielens)
9) Lodz dialect (Patrick Le Besco)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 30 Aug 2002 03:32:53 -0400 (EDT)
From: Henri Jabko <hjabko@laposte.net>
Subject:  Di derefenung funem Parizer Yidish-Tsenter 

La Maison de la Culture Yiddish ouvre ses portes
le 14 octobre 2002
18, passage Saint-Pierre Amelot - Paris XIe.

The Paris Yiddish Center opens
October 14, 2002
at 18, passage Saint-Pierre Amelot in the 11th district of Paris

Di derefenung funem Parizer Yidish-Tsenter
vet forkumen dem 14tn oktober 2002
18, passage Saint-Pierre Amelot - 75011 Paris.

Der tsenter, vos vert geshafn durkh der Medem-biblyotek un der GEFIL -
Gezelshaft farn Yidish-Limed - vet zayn a heymish, varem ort, ofn far
alemen.

Er vet forleygn, in an ofenem un veltlekhn gayst :
- A medyatek : di zamlungen fun der Medem-biblyotek, a fonotek un a
 videotek
- Yidishkursn oyf ale madreyges
- Varshtatn (teater, gezang, poezye, kino, tents, klezmer-muzik)
- Aktivitetn far kinder (yidishkursn, khor, moleray-varshtat,
forshtelungen, yontoyvim, karnaval)
- Shmueskrayzn un arbet-grupes mit diskusyes oyf farsheydene temes
- Kultur-aktivitetn oyf yidish un frantseyzish (oysshtelungen, spektaklen,
kino-proyektsyes, referatn)
- A kafe-vinkl un a bikherkrom

A protimdike program vet ir krign onheyb september.
Kumt undz bazukhn !
Mer informatsyes ken men krign - in september - oyfn vayterdikn adres :

Bibliotheque Medem
52, rue Rene-Boulanger
75010 Paris
Tel. : (00 33) 1 48 03 20 17
Fax : (00 33) 1 42 02 17 04
Blitspost : medem@yiddishweb.com

Created by the Medem Library and the Association for Yiddish Studies,
this warm and friendly place will be yours.

It will host with an open-minded and secular spirit :
- a multimedia library including the Medem Library's collections, audio
and video collections,
- language courses at all levels,
- workshops  (theatre, songs, poetry, cinema, dance, Klezmer music...),
- children activities (yiddish courses, chorus, painting workshop,
entertainments, parties and carnivals...),
- conversation groups and discussions about ashkenazic world's themes,
- cultural activities in Yiddish and French (exhibitions, entertainments,
documentary and film screenings, conferences),
- a cafe and a bookshop.

Come to visit us soon !


2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 9 Sep 2002 13:53:27 -0400 (EDT)
From: "rafael goldwaser" <rafael.goldwaser@wanadoo.fr>
Subject: Lufteater program

Tayere khaveyrim

In gikhn vet ir kenen araynkukn in undzer program gevidmet Yiddish in
Ratnfarband, velkhn titl iz haynt tsu tog: "Tsvishn hamer un serp -
lebn un goyrl fun der yiddisher kultur in Ratnfarband", arayngeyendik
in undzer veb-zaytl:

www.lufteater.com

Undzer algemeyner veb zaytl is: http://lufteater.free.fr

Zayt gezunt un shtark.       

Refoel Goldwaser - Der Lufteater
Shtrasburg

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 23 Sep 2002 19:25:51 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Miriam Koral" <koralm@earthlink.net>
Subject: Art of Yiddish 3

Dear Friends, Yiddish Lovers, and Soldiers for Yiddish:

Sholem aleykhem!  We are pleased to announce the third annual Winter
Yiddish Intensive in Los Angeles, December 14 - 21, 2002, and the best
ever.  Attached is an advance announcement, just to give you an
overview.

This year we are creating a "bridge with Canada", with featured guests
Prof. Eugene Orenstein and Prof. Anna Gonshor (McGill University,
Montreal) and, back from Toronto by popular demand, Michael Wex.

The web site, www.yiddishinstitute.org will shortly have all the
details posted, and the brochure itself will follow.

Please join us for all or part -- Yiddish theater will come alive
before your eyes, you won't stop laughing, and your feet won't stop
dancing!
    
mit vareme grusn  With warm greetings--
Miriam Koral

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 24 Sep 2002 14:12:15 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Rozenberg, Dorothee " <rozen@ptc.com>
Subject: Lena Jedwab Rozenberg's diary

My mother, Lena Jedwab Rozenberg, kept a diary (in Yiddish) while in
Russia between 1941 and 1945. The original version was published in
Paris in 1999 and reviewed in the June 7, 2002 issue of the Yiddish
Forverts, together with theYale UP anthology, Salvaged Pages:
http://yiddish.forward.com/060702/bookshelf.html

as well as in Heshbon a couple of years ago (by Chava Rosenfarb).

The american edition of the book, with an introduction by Jan Gross and
a Foreword by Irena Klepfisz, will be published by Holmes & Meier this
week: http://holmesandmeier.com/titles/rozenberg.html

My father, Sholem Rozenberg, who works at the Medem Library in Paris,
gave an interview to the Boston Yiddish radio station about the book a
couple of months ago: http://www.yiddishvoice.com/

I am trying to promote and publicize this American edition and was
wondering whether Mendele would be an appropriate place for it. Please
let me know.

A sheynem dank un a gut gezunt yor.

Doroth‚e Rozenberg

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 24 Sep 2002 18:19:18 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett" <bkg@nyu.edu>
Subject: Jewish Dance: New Publication. 

Special Jewish Dance Publication

Jewish Folklore & Ethnology Review
Vol. 20, No. 1-2, Spring 2001. 

This issue, edited by Judith Brin Ingber, features richly illustrated
articles about Israeli folk dance and dance in Israel; the first
Israeli folk dance tour to European Displaced Persons camps in 1947;
contemporary choreography in Israel and the U.S.; Jewish dance in
Renaissance Italy and under Stalin; dance rituals of the Hasidim,
Yemenites and Ethiopian Jews. The authors are expert European, Israeli
and American dance scholars.

This publication has been listed in the top 20 best dance writings for
2001 and is being considered for the de la Torre Bueno Prize for the
most distinguished original book of dance scholarship. This prize is
the only adjudicated recognition in the field of dance publication.
   
Price: $20. Foreign purchases add $5 per order.  Checks should be
payable to Jewish Folklore and Ethnology Review.  Mail to JFER, 4350
Fairfax Dr., Suite 640, Arlington, VA 22203.

For information contact:
Judith Brin Ingber, Guest Editor
Ph: 952-920-1712;  JbrinIngber@cs.com

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 27 Sep 2002 14:56:18 -0400 (EDT)
From: Elizabeth Weintraub<liz@yiddishculture.org>
Subject: Yiddish Culture in Florida

Tayere chaverim (Dear Friends):

We recently sent you materials about our exciting upcoming cultural
season which includes a month-long celebration of Marc Chagall, (the
artist and Yiddish poet), several performances of the nationally
acclaimed Der Yiddisher Mikado, the launch of an ambitious Yiddish for
Youth Initiative that offers Yiddish culture and language opportunities
to an increasing number of young people, the publication of 8 new books
(including two geared for children), expanding our lecture series, art
exhibitions and Yiddish On-Line college programs and much more. (see
our full schedule at www.yiddishculture.org/events.html
<http://www.yiddishculture.org/events.html>)  If you live in South
Florida, you know of the important work we do.  If you live elsewhere,
an increasing number of our cultural programs are now available on-line
(or will be in the coming months) and of course our books and our
programs are being transplanted to many new areas.

We are urgently looking for volunteer grant writers with some
experience in fundraising, particular federal grants to assist us in
funding future programming.  If you can help, or know someone who can
(you need not be local to assist) please e-mail us immediately at
info@yiddishculture.org

Mit vareme yidishe grusn,

David Weintraub

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 2 Oct 2002 04:07:08 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Joseph Sherman" <Joseph.Sherman@oriental-institute.ox.ac.uk>
Subject: Yiddish after the Holocaust: call for papers

CALL FOR PAPERS
Yiddish after the Holocaust
Conference: Oxford Centre for Hebrew and Jewish Studies
28-31 August 2003

A conference on the state of Yiddish culture in the post-Holocaust
world will be held under the auspices of the Oxford Centre for Hebrew
and Jewish Studies at Yarnton Manor, Oxford, from Monday 28 - Thursday
31August 2003.

To date, published research on the development of Yiddish language,
literature and culture in the post-Holocaust world has been small. The
recognition that Yiddish suffered a mortal blow as a result of the
Holocaust in Europe to some extent encouraged a renewed Yiddish
cultural revival in the United States, in the countries of the British
Commonwealth, and elsewhere. These developments need further
examination, to explore the extent to which Yiddish and Yiddish studies
have experienced a renascence in the contemporary world.

Among topics that this conference hopes to address, and on which papers
will be most welcome, include all post-1945 investigation into Yiddish
literature and journalism, education and scholarship, theatre and the
arts, politics, linguistics, sociolinguistics and dialectology, and
Yiddish as a language of religious revival. In addition, topics will be
welcome that investigate such related areas as translations from
Yiddish, changing world attitudes to Yiddish, adaptations of Yiddish in
print or on stage and screen, and representations of Yiddish in other
cultural contexts.

Papers can be presented in either English or Yiddish; both languages
will be welcome.

The conference will be held at Yarnton Manor, the home of the Oxford
Centre for Hebrew and Jewish Studies, which is situated in the
countryside about 4 miles outside Oxford. Delegates will arrive by
Monday afternoon, 28 August, in time for the opening dinner that
evening. Conference sessions will take place from 9.00 a.m. on Tuesday
29 until midday on Thursday 31 August. The cost of the conference will
be 300 British pounds sterling (US$ 470), which will cover the
registration fee and will include accommodation, the conference opening
dinner, and breakfast, lunch and dinner for the full three nights and
two days of the conference.

Proposals are invited for individual papers or complete panels to be
presented at this conference. All proposals for individual papers or
complete panels should include the following: (1) An abstract of
prospective papers of between 200-250 words, and (2) in the case of
complete panels, the names and addresses of all participants and the
subject matter of their presentations.

Prospective participants should submit the abstracts of their proposals
at latest by 30 November 2002

Abstracts should include your name, address, telephone number, e-mail
address, institution, the title of your presentation, and a brief
curriculum vitae.

Please submit your abstracts and personal details to the Organising
Committee at one of the following addresses:

e-mail address (preferred)

joseph.sherman@oriental-institute.ox.ac.uk
fax no: 0944-01865-375-079

Mailing address:

Dr Joseph Sherman
Oxford Centre for Hebrew and Jewish Studies
Oriental Institute
Pusey Lane
OXFORD OX1 2LE
United Kingdom

It is anticipated that a volume of papers derived from this conference
will be published within a year after its conclusion (by Autumn 2004).

Joseph Sherman

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 2 Oct 2002 06:36:10 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Ivan-Kaja Dielens" <ivan@eblul.org>
Subject: Linguistic correspondent

Hello,

I am using this mailing list in order to reach the largest number
possible of fluent spokers of Yiddish.

My name is Ivan-Kaja DIELENS and I work on the MININF project launched
by the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL:
www.eblul.org). My task is to establish a network of linguistic
correspondents within the framework of this project. You will find
information about this position hereunder.

If you are interested in being a linguistic correspondent for Yiddish,
please contact me at the address indicated below and send me, if
possible, your curriculum vitae. I would be greatful if you could
forward this information to any person that could be interested. Since
the project is Europe-based, applicants should be residing in Europe.

Thank you very much for your help.
Best regards,

Ivan-Kaja DIELENS.
Development - MININF Project
European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages
Rue Saint-Josse, 49
B-1210 Brussels
t‚l : +32 (0)2.250.31.65
fax : +32 (0)2.218.19.74
email : ivan@eblul.org
web : www.eblul.org/mininf

Position of Linguistic Correspondent

PRESENTATION

The European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL) is an independent
organisation working for the preservation and promotion of regional or
minority languages. EBLUL has launched recently an internet-based
project named MININF (Minority Information). The aim of this project is
to collect and promote multi-thematic material in or about these
languages. Such material includes web sites, multimedia documents,
texts and so on.

In order to develop this project according to the concrete needs and
desire of the communities of minority languages, we are looking to
develop a network of linguistic correspondents in each of the
communities concerned. The aim is twofold:

a) In terms of functioning of the project, the existence of the
correspondents will allow to ensure the updating and quality of the
content offered (regulate the nature of the information made available
online), to evaluate the needs for translation in minority languages
and to measure the impact of these actions on the community

b) Concerning the general aim of promotion of minority languages, the
network is a perfect opportunity for the members of the communities to
develop strong skills in terms of techniques of management and
promotion, of new technologies, and develop concrete knowledge of
existing possibilities for financial support. Furthermore, the European
dimension of the project creates unlimited opportunity for discussion
and exchange of experience and practice among the different communities
concerned.

POSITION

In the framework of the MININF project, EBLUL offers you the
opportunity to accomplish a 10 months unpaid, remote internship as
linguistic correspondent. You will be entirely integrated to the MININF
project as responsible for your language. You will work in close
relation, by e-mail or by phone, with the MININF team based in
Brussels, as well as with the other linguistic correspondents. An
online editing system will allow you to work and communicate from any
workstation connected to the Internet.

TASKS

Content management:
Your task will be to check and moderate the content edited online. You
will see to it that any improper content will be disregarded from our
published material. You will furthermore verify that all information
made available is up to date. The visibility of minority languages on
Internet being one of the goals of MININF, you will be responsible for
the translation, on a punctual basis, of the different main technical
functionalities (e-mail accounts, editing systems, portal, etc.).

Promotion:
One of your most important tasks will be to promote the project and
enhance its visibility within your own community to expose the
advantages and possibilities made available through it.

Evaluation:
You will also be responsible to give an evaluation and some feedback on
the concrete impact of the project and its actions in your community.

BENEFITS
Participation to this project as a linguistic correspondent is a unique
opportunity to contribute to the preservation and, above all, promotion
of your language and its visibility on the Internet. You will develop,
through this experience, your skills in management and language
promotion, as well as in Internet and computer technologies. Your work
will put you in direct contact with European regional institutions and
allow you to become more familiar with their functioning. Along these
possibilities for your personal academic formation, the project offers
you the opportunity to develop a network of correspondents around
Europe with the equal aim and desire to promote their language. The
establishment of this network will be made official by the organisation
of a study trip in Brussels in December 2002, for which you will be
attributed an inter-rail pass.

CONTACTS AND APPLICATIONS
For further information and for applications, please contact the MININF
team of EBLUL in Brussels at +32.2.250.31.65. Or by e-mail, contact
Ivan-Kaja DIELENS at ivan@eblul.org <mailto:ivan@eblul.org>

Ivan-Kaja Dielens 

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 9 Sep 2002 08:36:51 -0400 (EDT)
From: Le Besco Patrick <lebescopat@yahoo.fr>
Subject: Lodz dialect

I started to write a linguistic description of the yiddish dialect of
Lodz. I work with the recordings I made in Paris and in Poland, in the
very place. I wonder if it would possible to have a copy of the
material collected in the 50 or the 60 for the survey of Doctor Herzog.
Sure it is in this collect very good material.

Thank you for your answer.

Patrick Le Besco
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 12.008

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://www.mendele.net
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html

