
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 11.003
May 29, 2001

1) Corob Fellowship in Yiddish Studies (Joan Sinclair)
2) Library Director position (Uzi Adini)
3) kharedi Yiddish literature (Yankev Lewis)
4) Yiddish and microfilm (Adam Levitin)
5) Musicians' Raft: Between New York and Sejny (Michael Steinlauf)
6) Chave Rosenfarb (Marjorie/Mirl Schonhaut Hirshan)
7) 2001 Canadian Jewish Book Awards (Bernard Katz)
8) Lambori for Labori (Michael Schein)
9) Lambori for Labori (Berish Goldshteyn)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 21 May 2001 11:41:39 +0100
From: Joan B Sinclair <jbs@herald.ox.ac.uk>
Subject: Corob Fellowship in Yiddish Studies

OXFORD CENTRE FOR HEBREW AND JEWISH STUDIES AND UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
COROB FELLOWSHIP IN YIDDISH STUDIES

Applications are invited for the Corob Fellowship in Yiddish Studies at
the Oxford Centre for Hebrew and Jewish Studies, the appointment to
start in October 2001 or as soon as possible thereafter.  The
appointment may be made in any area of Yiddish Studies, but suitable
candidates must have an excellent command of the Yiddish language and a
thorough grounding in Yiddish literature and culture.  In addition to
pursuing research in his or her areas of scholarly interest, the
successful candidate will be expected to offer undergraduate and
postgraduate tuition, including teaching a course for the Diploma in
Jewish Studies, and to supervise doctoral students.  He or she will
also be expected to assume an active role within the Centre and the
University and undertake such administrative duties as are required.

The postholder will be a member of the Oxford University Teaching and
Research Unit in Hebrew and Jewish Studies, initially with the title of
Visiting Lecturer and eligible in due course to be considered for the
title of University Research Lecturer.

Scholars of all ranks will be considered for this position.  The
appointment will be made for an initial 5-year period, renewable after
review.

Salary will be on the University Lecturer scale GBP19,461 to GBP34,347
per annum plus benefits, depending on age and experience.

Applications including 3 copies of a curriculum vitae should be
submitted to:

    Joan Sinclair
    Fellowships & Visitors Co-ordinator
    Oxford Centre for Hebrew & Jewish Studies
    Yarnton Manor
    Oxford, OX5 1PY
    ENGLAND

    Direct telephone line (answerphone) & fax: +44-1865-370830

Applicants should also ensure that letters of recommendation from 3
referees
are sent directly to the above address.

Review of applications will begin on 31 May 2001 and will continue until
the
post is filled.

The Oxford Centre for Hebrew and Jewish Studies and the University of
Oxford
are equal opportunities employers.

Joan Sinclair

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 18 May 2001 11:24:38 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Uzi Adini" <uadini@gratz.edu>
Subject: Library Director position

Library Director for a specialized college of Jewish studies, with
resources of 100,000 books and periodicals.  Three years of
administrative experience desirable, MLS required, and strong
background in Judaica, with emphasis on Hebrew and/or Yiddish.
Computer and communication skills are essential. Library serves
students of all ages.

Send Resume and salary requirements to Anita Coleman, Gratz College,
7605 Old York Road, Melrose Park, PA 19027, fax 215-635-1046, or e-mail
acoleman@gratz.edu.  No phone calls, please.

Uziel Adini
Melrose Park, PA

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 4 May 2001 11:50:49 -0400 (EDT)
From: Justin Lewis / Jane Enkin <jcjlewis@chass.utoronto.ca>
Subject: kharedi Yiddish lit

In light of the ongoing discussions about Yiddish literature in the
Kharedi world, I thought this letter to Der Yid (April 27 2001) might
be of interest.  (It also touches on a research question of mine:
trying to get a sense of the status/prestige of Hasidic stories in
Hasidic communities today.  I'll be grateful for any feedback on that
question.)

Yankev Lewis

The author of the letter is Shmuel Segal Roth of Brooklyn.  It appears
on p. 6 of the April 27 _Der Yid_.  I'll use a YIVO transliteration
following the spelling in the original.

Di Yidishe Shprakh Kosher't Nisht Yede Bikh"l

Tayerer redaktor un redaktsye fun unzer libe vokhnshrift "Der Yid",
he"y [Hashem aleyhem, yikhyu (?)]

Ikh bet aykh git mir di gelegnheyt oystsudrukn mayn meynung vegn a gor
vikhtige zakh vos es zet mir oys az s'vert alts mer un mer arayngegesn
baym oylem un m'khapt zikh aleyn nisht.

Azoy vi di tekhnik fun druk hot zikh in di letste yorn gor shtark
antviklt, un tsu drukn a bikhl iz shoyn haynt nisht farbundn mit groyse
shverigkeytn, iz di market farfleytst gevorn mit farshidene bikhlekh
oyf di idishe shprakh.  Ober nisht yeder ken farfasn a bikhl mit a
rikhtige idishe historishe inhalt, to vos tut men?  M'nemt goy'ishe
bikhlekh, m'zetst zey iber oyf di idishe sprakh, un es vert "a idishe
mayse bikhl". Oder nemt men bikhlekh vos tsionishtishe shrayber hobn
farfast oyf di hebreishe shprakh, un m'zetst zey iber oyf idish.

Kedey tsu kosher'n di bikhlekh varft men arayn a por psukim, vi lemoshl
"mo rabu maasekho H'", oder "Ezri meyim H'" u. a. v. [un azoy vayter].
Un m'ken shoyn tsushraybn az s'git arayn "idishkeyt", in di tsayt vos
dos bikhl iz ful mit hoyle fantazyes, anthalt nisht keyn shum
historishe geshikhte, un es iz geherig bitl zman.

Meyle ven a meydl leynt es, iz oykh a sofek tsi s'iz ratzam, ober ven a
bokher leynt es, darf er visn az dos iz geherig bitl toyre un bitl
zman. Un vi an amoyre hot geentfert far eynem vos hot im gefregt tsi
m'meg lernen khokhmes yevonis -- tsey uvdok bizman shehu loy yoym veloy
loylo, vayl der tog mit di nakht darf zayn gevidmet far limed hatoyre,
vi es shteyt "v'hogiso boy yoymom volaylo".

Derfar darf men visn, az dos vos dos bikhl gefint zikh in a idishe
sforim gesheft, meynt nokh nisht az dos bikhl iz a "seyfer", es iz nokh
alts bloyz a bikh"l, un dos tor nisht geleynt vern in di tsayt vos darf
zayn gevidment far limed hatoyre.

Oyb m'vil dafke zikh opruen abisl dem moyekh, zenen faran fil mayse
bikhlekh fun tsadikim, biografyes fun tsadikim, velkhe anthaltn mayses
vos m'hot mekabl geven ish mipi ish, velkhe brengen arayn in mentsh
emunes tsadikim, emune un bitokhn baH', mides toyves vekhu' [vekhule].
Bikhlekh mit a visnshaftlikhn inhalt, vu m'ken zikh aynkoyfn yedies, u.
a. v. [un azoy vayter].  Un nisht mayses mit hoyle fantazyes, vos der
leyener hot keyn toyeles derfun.

Mit dank foroys far opdrukn dos brivl

ayer lang-yoriger leyener

Shmuel Seg"l Roth, Bruklin

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 6 May 2001 23:57:07 -0400 (EDT)
From: ajl43@columbia.edu (Adam J. Levitin)
Subject: Yiddish and microfilm

Sholem Berger's posting is of appropriate concern to all those who have
occasion to consult American Yiddish newspapers for their work.

I have read through a great many issues of the Forverts from 1897 (when
the microfilms at the YIVO begin) through 1915, and while the majority
of the texts are excellently microfilmed, there are plenty of errors
and even missing pages.  (For example, whoever did the microfilming did
not think that advertisements would be of any scholarly interest and
therefore often didn't bother microfilming pages that had only
advertisements.)  I have often found myself wishing that I had an
original paper copy to consult. While microfilm does have the advantage
of easy photocopying (direct from the machine), reading it is a
tremendous strain on the eyes.  Even with magnification, I frequently
find it quite difficult to read the smaller print articles.

Similarly, while the reprints offered through the National Yiddish Book
Center are a wonderful service, there is a definite decline in the
quality of printing from original texts to the reprints, and errors do
occur in the reprinting process (e.g., in pagination).  Moreover, the
covers and binding of the original works, themselves sometimes of great
interest, are not conveyed in the paperback reprints.  It should also
be noted that certain works, such as those of Bashevis and Grade, are
not available in reprints because of copyright issues.

I fear that it is largely too late to do much about the microfilming
situation for the American Yiddish press--it hardly seems practical for
any institution to store thousands of paper copies of rarely consulted
American Yiddish newspapers.  For all of its problems, microfilming may
still be the best way to go.

Adam Levitin
New York, NY

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 18 May 2001 14:59:03 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Michael Steinlauf" <msteinlauf@earthlink.net>
Subject: Musicians' Raft: Between New York and Sejny

The Musicians' Raft:
Between New York and Sejny

 For the better part of a millenium, Yiddish culture flourished in the
Ashkenazi Jewish communities of East Central Europe, above all in the
shtetl, the small town set amidst regions of multiple religions and
nationalities. Thanks to centuries of reciprocal influence and
dialogue, the culture of these borderlands blended their varied
elements into a whole. Yiddish culture was a strong and permanent part
of this whole.

 The Shoah put an end to Yiddish culture in this part of Europe. This,
at least, was how it seemed. I. B. Singer, in his Nobel Prize
acceptance speech, referred to Yiddish as a disappearing language, a
language that belonged only to the past. At the time, he already lived
in New York, having participated in yet another Jewish exodus, this
time across the Atlantic Ocean. Singer was accompanied in this
migration by many other Jewish writers, musicians, actors, and artists
who still retained East Central European traditions in their hearts. In
America they continued to develop klezmer music or Yiddish theater,
blending them with jazz and Tin Pan Alley, vaudeville and Broadway. For
these artists too the Shoah appeared to be a decisive break, after
which Yiddish culture seemed to vanish forever.

 And yet...In various places in the world in recent years the Yiddish
language began to revive. Courses, summer programs, university
departments devoted to Yiddish began to enjoy increasing popularity.
Above all there has been an extraordinary renaissance of klezmer music.
Its capital is now New York, where in neighborhoods such as the East
Village or Brighton Beach, sparks of East Central European Jewish
spirituality now flare.

 This renaissance, whose creators have been above all third and fourth
generation descendants of Jewish immigrants to America, then began to
attract the interest of East Central Europeans. Similarly to Israeli
participants in the March of the Living, representatives of the
Ashkenazi tradition from New York and other corners of the world
started to arrive in East Central Europe. Just like their Israeli
counterparts, they pilgrimaged to Auschwitz and other sites of Jewish
martyrdom. But not only. They traveled to the Carpathians, to Krakow,
Prague and Vilnius, to Bukowina and Polesia, to Siedmiogrod and
Maramures, to the Balkans, wherever they hoped to discover traces of
the old Jewish culture. Sometimes they met Gypsies who still remembered
the music they used to play with Jewish musicians at weddings.
Sometimes they met surviving Yiddish writers or musicians, proving that
Singer was not the last of their kind. Elsewhere they met those who
remembered their grandparents, could show them where a family house
still remained, or a spot in the Jewish cemetery. Sometimes they
encountered vulgar antisemitic scrawls on a wall, a commentary of
prejudice and hatred, contempt for the dead and for memory, propaganda
for oblivion.

 Travellers from New York and other parts of the world also came to
Sejny, a small town of the borderlands once populated by Jews. How
surprised they were, when within the walls of its old synagogue they
heard the sound of klezmer music performed by very young people. Only
recently these musicians had been students at the secondary school in
Sejny. Through the Borderlands Center, they began to learn about the
multicultural past of their region, including its Yiddish culture. The
next step had been working on a production of The Dybbuk and
researching the music connected to Anski's dramatic world. Later came
meetings with musicians at the annual Jewish Culture Festival in
Krakow, tapes and cd's sent from New York, workshops with klezmer
clarinetist David Krakauer, travels in East Central Europe to people
who still remembered, and through songs, stories and instrumental music
could still express and transmit their memories.

 That is how New York and Sejny met. Though these are actual places,
they also stand for numerous other places on both sides of the ocean
where similar dialogue is occurring. We are witnessing the rediscovery
of routes which had seemed permanently lost because of the awful
history of our times. A new meeting emerges, beyond broken links,
tragic conflicts, severed roots, and ruined memory.

 Most important, this meeting takes place in a living cultural context,
not at all limited to the past, a context in which we encounter
modernity and pose the most essential questions for today and tomorrow.
We are aware that this is only a beginning, that much more remains to
be done to keep the routes open, to have them truly affect the world
around us.

 This is why we have initiated the Musicians' Raft. May it ride the
waves between New York and Sejny. May it lead the way to the remaining
traces of Yiddish culture in East Central Europe. May it lead to
contact with those in Vilnius, Grodno, Czernowitz who have preserved
the Yiddish language, Jewish music and song. May it renew the links
among people of various religions and nationalities. May it lead young
people in places where Yiddish culture was once part of a common
heritage to a meeting with those "others" who have long only revealed
themselves in silence and ruins.

 June 17-27, 2001 the Klezmer Ensemble of Sejny Theater will host a
gathering of young musicians from East Central Europe along with some
of the most outstanding klezmer musicians from the United States.

 The idea for the Musicians' Raft was born out of our contact with
David Krakauer at the Jewish Culture Festival in Krakow organized by
Janusz Makuch. David then came to Sejny and organized workshops for our
ensemble. We also traveled together to meet Jews in Kaunas (Kowno).
Last year we decided to expand the scope of our meetings and invite
others to share in our adventure.

 We would like this year's workshops to be a creative artistic quest:
to draw on the varied musical traditions which participants represent
in order to discover new sounds, to inspire the creation of new music
rooted in the sensibility of youth.

 May our Musicians' Raft ride the waves between the old world and the
new, tradition and modernity, one generation and another.

 Music workshops will be led by: Acclaimed clarinetist David Krakauer,
founding member of the Klezmatics and the Kronos Quartet, currently
leader of the band Klezmer Madness. Celebrated violinist, singer, and
connoisseur of Jewish folkways Michael Alpert, member of the band Brave
Old World. Eminent bass and cymbal player Stuart Brotman, member of the
band Brave Old World. Celebrated violinist and singer Deborah Strauss,
a mainstay of the international klezmer renaissance, most recently
performing with Jeff Warschauer. Jeff Warshauer, internationally-known
mandolin, banjo and guitar player, currently performing with Deborah
Strauss. Participants will include young musicians from Belarus,
Ukraine, Rumania, Moldavia, Hungary, Bosnia, and Yugoslavia.

 A series of lectures, readings and discussions on Jewish culture in
Eastern Europe, led by Professor Michael Steinlauf of Gratz College in
Philadelphia, will constitute an additional part of the program.

 In collaboration with the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research in New
York, there will be an exhibition of rare prewar photographs of Jewish
Eastern Europe taken by photographer, music critic, singer and
ethnographer Menachem Kipnis.

 There will also be showings of prewar Yiddish films.

 An important part of the program will be trips to Lithuania and
Belarus to meet with Jews who still know Yiddish and remember
traditional Jewish music and customs.

 A special guest of the program will be Josef Burg, a Yiddish writer
from Czernowitz whose volume of stories entitled Okruchy (Remnants)
will appear in the Meridian series published by Pogranicze Publishers.

 The program will conclude on June 27 with a special concert at the
White Synagogue in Sejny, to which we invite all those who sympathize
with our ideas.

 Workshops will be closed, available to a limited number of
participants only. Food and housing will be available without cost to
all participants. The costs of travel are the responsibility of
participants.

 The project is directed by Malgorzata Sporek-Czyzewska and Wojciech
Szroeder on behalf of the Borderlands Center of Arts, Cultures, and
Nationalities and the Borderlands Foundation. For further information,
please contact us at <teatr@pogranicze.sejny.pl>,
tel./fax 48 87 565 03 69.

Michael Steinlauf

6)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 19 May 2001 06:01:19 -0400 (EDT)
From: Marjorie Hirshan <marj@hirshan.com>
Subject: Chave Rosenfarb

Orchids, amaranths, and a blessing on their head to Syracuse University
Press. Can anyone name for us the prime mover whose new happy selection
of _Menachem Mendl_ follows Chave Rosenfarb's awesome two-volume set,
_Bociany_ and _Of Lodz and Love_?

The Literary Translation Association of Canada (LTAC) has named Chave
Rosenfarb (a Manger Prize winner) the winner of their prize for her
translations of _Bociany_ and _Of Lodz and Love_ (Syracuse University
2000, ISBN 0-8156-0577-3)

And how wise they were. _Bociany_ is awesome - deep and fresh and true
- a masterpiece. Her translation retains the Yiddish flavor, rich with
our idioms, and her engaging characters make your heart their new
permanent home. They remain at my side throughout the day. _Of Lodz and
Love_ continues the exciting story of Binele whom you shall embrace
into your family.

Pre-war shtetl life comes alive again, vibrant with richness and
poverty. Rosenfarb is intense, touching at essences through her
powerful heroes and anti-heroes - life and death, good and evil, faith
and doubt, love and its loss, tradition and change.

What a fulfilling banquet of ideas - written in wonderful style.

Marjorie/Mirl Schonhaut Hirshan
Boynton Beach, Florida

7)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 29 May 2001 03:13:37 -0400 (EDT)
From: Bernard Katz <bkatz@uoguelph.ca>
Subject: 2001 Canadian Jewish Book Awards - 13th Year!

Of special interest to Mendelayners is Vivian Felsen's translation from
the Yiddish of her grandfather Israel Mendres' "Montreyal fun nekhten"
Kaneder Adler, 1947) -- found in the final paragraph of this release.

This year, the "bar mitzvah" year of the Canadian Jewish Book Awards,
our awards are highlighted by a special double prize for biography or
memoir to two icons of Canadian culture.  Both prizes have been awarded
posthu- mously: the Louis L. Lockshin Award goes to the late renowned
novelist Matt Cohen for his autobiographical "Typing: a Life In 26
Keys" (Random House Canada, 2000); and the Koffler Centre Prize has
been awarded to the late beloved actor-director Al Waxman, author of
"Thats What I Am" (Malcolm Lester, 2000).

Highlighting this year's gala presentation evening and celebration of
Canadian books with Jewish content is our guest reader Andy Barrie,
popular broadcaster and host of the CBC's "Metro Morning" radio
program. Mr. Barrie will read selections from each of the winning
autobiographies as a tribute to these two great Canadian artists.

Prizes in an unprecedented twelve categories are being awarded this
year. The Committee had a very challenging, though rewarding, task in
choosing the winners from more than fifty books submitted from across
Canada - an embarrassment of riches that proclaims the vitality of
Jewish writing and scholarship in Canada. The evening's events will
take place in the Leah Posluns Theatre, Koffler Centre of the Arts, at
the Bathurst Jewish Community Centre, 4588 Bathurst Street (between
Shephard and Finch) on Wednesday, June 6, at 7:30 pm. Admission is free
and there will be a open reception following the ceremonies with
opportunity to purchase books and meet most of the authors. Parking at
the BJCC is avaiable free of charge.

The Beatrice and Martin Fischer Fiction Award for a first first novel
goes to Michael Kaufman for his inventive and transcendent "The
Possibility of Dreaming On a Night without Stars" (Viking, 1999). In
History, Erna Paris' internationally acclaimed "Long Shadows: Truth,
Lies and History" (Knopf Canada, 2000) wins the Dorothy Shoichet Prize;
while Franklin Bialystok's significant study, "Delayed Impact: the
Holocaust and the Canadian Jewish Community" (McGill-Queens University
Press, 2000) garners the Joseph and Fay Tanenbaum Award in Canadian
Jewish History.

Vancouver's Irene Watts, a previous award winner in this category, wins
this year's Isaac Frischwasser Memorial Award in young adult fiction
for her engaging "Remember Me" (Tundra Books, 2000).  The first winner
in a new category, the Laks-Wajsfus Prize in World Jewish Culture, goes
to the Beth Tzedec Reuben and and Helene Dennis Museum for their
beautifull art book, "Art and Tradition: treasures of Jewish Life",
edited by curator Dorion Liebgott (Beth Tzedec Congregation, 2000).

Winners in other categories are: Barry Dov Walfish, editor of "Apples
of Gold In Settings of Silver" (Pontifical Institute of Mediaevil
Studies, 1999), who receives the Penina Rubinoff Memorial Prize for
Biblical or Rabbinic Scholarship; Vivian Felsen, translator of the
important "Montreal of Yesterday: Jewish Life in montreal, 1900-1920"
(Vehicule Press, 2000), who gains the Izzy and Betty Kirshenbaum
Foundation Prize for Yiddish Translation; Gitel Donath, author of the
touching "My Bones Don't Rest In Auschwitz" (Kaplan Publishing, 2000),
winning the Abraham and Fay Bergel Award for Holocaust Memoir; Karen
Shenfeld, who receives the Henry Fuerstenberg - Betty and Morris Aaron
Memorial Prize for Poetry for her collection "The Law of Return"
(Guernica Editions, 2000); Howard Margolian, whose very controversial
"Unauthorized Entry: the Truth About War Criminals In Canada,
1946-1956" (University of Toronto Press, 2000) garners the Morris
Winemaker Award for Scholarship on a Jewish Theme; and F.C. DeCoste
together with fellow editor Bernard Schwartz, who win the Canadian
Society for Yad Vashem Prize in Holocaust History for their revealing
"The Holocaust's Ghost" (University of Alberta Press, 2000).

Bernard Katz

8)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 27 Apr 2001 19:43:12 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Michael M. Schein" <mschein@its.caltech.edu>
Subject: Lambori for Labori

As far as I remember, the name of Zola's lawyer Labori [10.055] does
appear as "Lambori" in the original of Sholom-Aleichem's "Dreyfus in
Kasrilevke". This is an intentional distortion, meant to make a little
fun of the Kasrilevke Jews.  Their mispronunciation of the name of one
the chief players fits in with the whole picture given in the story: of
Kasrilevke's private version of the Dreyfus affair, quite separate from
the happenings in Paris.

Michael Schein

9)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 28 Apr 2001 10:31:00 -0400 (EDT)
From: Barry Goldstein <bag@shore.net>
Subject: Lambori for Labori

Not to continue to beat a dead lawyer [10.055], nor to be overly
defensive about my transcription, but it was Sholem Aleykhem's own joke
to call the man "Lambori". s'shteyt punkt azoy inem tekst dray mol --
tsvey von zey in gendzn-fislekh.

berish goldshteyn
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 11.003

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://www.mendele.net
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html



